

I
INTRODUCTION

They hold the emotions to be judgments.Q
The notorious year of 1968 and the turbulent years that followed it
were times that I consciously took part in, and so I belong to the
so-called protest generation. I find that funny, although of course
this label is undeserved and says nothing about my contribution to
the protests. The majority of that generation, after all, either did
not protest at all, or only about minor issues. They wanted a higher
student grant, or played the radio very loudly as a protest against
complacency; they bleached their jeans and refused to comb their
hair. But some went further and wanted a totally different society.
Many people are full of courage and enthusiasm when they are
young; they are full of expectations as they begin to strive for their
ideals. They are optimistic and think they will soon be able to
change the world. If this does not succeed after demonstrations and
suchlike, discouragement often follows.
I too have always extensively criticised ‘the existing order’ and protested against a wide variety of things, and I have always dreamed
of a different, better society. My circle of friends consisted largely of
people who also criticised and protested and dreamed of and strove
for a better society. Gradually, however, this group became smaller,
while I continued to seek alternatives and became more consistent
in my views about the state of the world.
Is it possible to observe the state of the world and still be happy?
8

Is it possible to work for change without becoming discouraged? I
think that ideas from the Early Stoa can help to prevent a crippling
disillusionment setting in.
≤

One of their ideas is about the phenomenon of anger. Left-wing
movements, socialists, communists, anarchists, anti-globalists,
utopians, feminists, anti-racists and animal rights activists tend
to think mostly in terms of conflict, and their motivating force is
mostly a form of anger, namely outrage at inequality, i.e. over the
possessiveness and egoism of a part of humanity.
Radicalism increases in line with anger, or so it sometimes seems,
but anger is not necessary for a movement aiming for a better world;
indeed, it is more likely to be damaging. With help from some Early
Stoa ideas, I hope to show that social change activity can be done
well, indeed much better and more enjoyably, without this anger.
≤

Here is an example. Many years ago, in the time that I began to
read about Stoicism, there was a violent meeting between radical
left-wing activists and a group of extreme right-wing people. It is
good that alert people warned (and still warn) about extreme rightwing movements and other bad developments, but it ended up with
a lot of damage being caused by left-wing people, which the violent
types considered ‘a good thing’. Others became furious about this,
which in turn provoked yet more outrage. Then it struck me: what
an improvement it would be if the anger could be completely ‘abolished’! Anger—from mild irritation to blind hatred—clearly ends
up increasing misery, after all.
Can a Stoic form of social protest exist: one that is sober, well thought through and not based on anger? Is a Stoic style of social revolution possible? In the last chapters, I will return to this question.
≤

This book is both about personal happiness and happiness in a
broader sense: building a better world. Whether these two goals are
connected, and if so in what manner, is covered in the last chapters
9

of this book. In the meantime…
In the 1970s the slogan ‘We demand happiness’ appeared from time
to time, painted on walls or written on bus shelters. I considered
it one of the better slogans, because this phrase expressed the idea
that you can do more than pursuing material interests and opposing
a wide range of things. However, there is no ‘right to happiness’.
Happiness cannot come from outside—with the ‘right’ ingredients
(i.e. with specific knowledge) you can create it yourself.
≤

Feelings are a consequence of earlier thoughts—that is one of the
inspiring insights of the Stoics. This Stoic view on feelings and
thoughts forms one of the most important themes of this book.
Feeling and thinking seem to be two different ways of reacting,
each with its own conclusion for action. The Stoics, however, saw
feelings as judgments, therefore as thoughts or consequences of
thoughts. If you look at it in these terms, ‘feeling’ and ‘thinking’
are two sides of the same coin.
People who ‘hide their feelings’ consider just one side of the coin
and pay no attention to the thoughts lying behind the ‘hidden’ feelings. Those who ‘rely only on their feelings’ only consider the other
side of the coin and are not aware that, just like others (the more
‘rational’ types) they are in fact following specific ideas. Because
of this, a lot of possibilities for improving personal lives as well as
political life are lost.

sides of the same coin is that someone can never be ‘too rational’.
This would be like saying that reasoning is too logical or that a sum
is too accurate. Being cold or distant is not rational, because if you
are really rational then you use not just your intellect but also your
‘feelings’, or more precisely: you process in a critical manner the
ideas lying behind your ‘feelings’.
Chapter IV includes more about feelings and thinking in the Early
Stoa, and Chapter XI includes a practical elaboration of these
ideas.
≤

I have tried to maintain a clear use of words for concepts such as
emotions and feelings; mostly I use the word ‘feelings’, and I see
‘strong feelings’ as a synonym for ‘passions’. When I mention
‘strong feelings’, in most cases I mean nagging feelings—this is not
always mentioned in order to avoid long-windedness. I prefer not to
use the word ‘emotions’, but it appears here and there in quotations,
where it again means ‘strong feelings’. I also use the words ‘affections’ or ‘affectations’ for all feelings and moods, whether strong or
not.
≤

Another consequence of this view of feeling and thinking as two

Regarding word use: the word ‘stoic’ is often used in the sense
of ‘showing fortitude’, ‘unyielding’, ‘without flinching’ or even
‘cold-blooded’, ‘indifferent’, ‘without feelings’ or ‘hard’. That is
not entirely unfounded. Stories of cold-bloodedness can be found
in the whole of Ancient Greek culture. It was told that Anaxagoras
(ca. 500-428 BC), one of the teachers of Socrates, reacted to the news
of the death of his sons as follows: ‘From the time they were born, I
knew they were mortals.’
Many philosophers were even calm about their own approaching
death. Take Socrates and Anaxagoras again. Both were sentenced to
death. Socrates had plenty of chance to escape, but he did not do so.
Anaxagoras was found not guilty by Pericles, but then committed
suicide.
Similar extreme ideals are found in India. In the Bhagavad-Gita it
appears that a ‘powerful individual’ is indifferent to insults and

10

11

≤

It is not through misfortune or calamity that people are prevented
from doing what they need to do, but by their thoughts about it.
That is one of the kernels of wisdom that follows from this Stoic
view on feeling and thinking. The Early Stoics found, incidentally,
that they themselves were far from achieving Stoic wisdom. The
only person they considered to have approached the Stoic ideal was
Socrates, who they considered one of their predecessors.
≤

honours, heat and cold, pleasure and pain. ‘Fortitude’ is probably
as old as humanity.
≤

Instead, as others have already done, I would like to advocate a
more subtle interpretation of Stoicism. Fortitude often comes down
to getting over something, ‘pulling yourself together’, acting tough
and indifferent, hiding feelings—all of that is in my opinion far
from Stoic. Stubbornness, indifference, toughness, honour, pride
and fear of losing face all play a role in this—feelings and attitudes
that are at odds with Stoicism as described by Zeno and other Early
Stoics.
It is often thought that the Stoics wanted to banish all feelings,
but that too appears not to be the case. In Chapter IV, there is more
about feelings and thoughts in the Early Stoa.
≤

There are few original Early Stoa texts remaining. What there is
comes mostly from quotations from their opponents—you may
well wonder how reliable they are. How much, then, remains of
the original scope via these possibly inaccurate quotations? And
that is without considering the issues of translation and interpretation. ‘Living without passions’ sounds somewhat different to
‘living without feelings’; ‘appropriate action’ sounds very different
to ‘duties’.
≤

Two ideas from Stoic ethics will play a key role in this book.
Firstly, there is the already-mentioned Stoic idea that feelings are
judgments, with the corollary that passions are based on errors of
thought. Secondly, there is the Stoic idea that happiness and ‘doing
good work’ go together.
I still think daily about these notions. Say, as an example, I get
agitated about a car which drives close to me through a big puddle.
Sure enough, my feelings stem from particular judgments. The driver is an egocentric person who does not realise that by driving like
this a cyclist can get wet or covered in mud. Or maybe it is someone
12

who does realise it but could not care less. It could even be someone
who does it on purpose. All the same, none of these three cases gives
me a reason to be agitated. What I can do is think about how the
world could be changed so that this sort of thing does not happen
anymore, and how I could devote myself to this cause. But is it
within my abilities to ensure that the world changes like this immediately, here and now? No, that is something for the long term, and
it will only succeed if lots and lots of people want the same thing.
But maybe I can say or do something to make clear to the ‘drencher’
what he or she has caused. In any case what I can do is to try not
to make a fool of myself because of this incident. I can avoid this
by observing that it is simply the case, in this point in time, that
many people drive cars, many of these people are in a hurry, many
of these people do not pay attention to whether the car is spraying
water, and some of these people feel a need to behave in an annoying
manner and intentionally frustrate others. Getting angry or upset or
feeling wronged does not help at all; by doing this, you only frustrate yourself and sometimes others too. Briefly getting wet because
of a couple of large splashes is of course nothing compared to the
damage caused to nature by vehicles’ exhaust fumes. Should I get
angry about this then? No, the same argument applies here too.
≤

It is surprising that something as interesting as this was thought
of so long ago, but the fact that an idea was thought of long ago
or in a faraway place does not by itself make an idea more valuable. It seems good to me to distinguish between historical interest
(‘interesting that they said that in those days’) and interest in the
ideas themselves (‘how inspiring!’). Although I enjoy reading books
about the first case, this book is primarily about the second case. Of
course, there is sometimes a mixture of the two, but in any case it
is not for me to give a complete picture of Stoic philosophy. For a
complete overview of Stoic philosophy, other books are available.W
≤

I do not want to heap praise on the ancient philosophers, because
I have also learned a lot from more recent thinkers. However, it
13

remains the case that it was these ‘old guys’ who really got me thinking.
The Ancient Greek philosophers were genuine freethinkers. Their
theories are often extreme, which makes them clear and challenging. Some ideas remain inspiring and useful in daily life, even
nowadays.
≤

It is sometimes said that it is not surprising that in the turbulent
period after the death of Alexander the Great (323 BC) different
schools of philosophy sprang up, each in their own way seeking to
attain peace of mind. To what extent there is a direct connection is
difficult to establish, and for my ‘project’ it does not matter. I think
that the world was a turbulent place in other times as well, and it is
no less so today.
Important parts of the Stoics’ ideas have probably remained applicable right down the ages for people everywhere.
≤

I did not just obtain inspiration from the Early (Greek) Stoa; the
Cynics, the Epicureans and the Sceptics are also mentioned in this
book. As of course are the Roman Stoics, far more of whose texts
have fortunately been preserved. Around one and a half centuries
before the first Stoics, there was incidentally already a philosopher,
the atomist Democritus, who spread some ‘stoic-sounding’ ideas.

for me. I enjoy thinking about this. It may well be that we would
have soon been at loggerheads with each other. This could happen just because I am a woman and therefore in Democritus’ eyes
less fit for philosophy, which would have made me furious. After
which I could have gone to Zeno, who would have considered me
quite unworthy as I was stupid enough to become furious. Phooey,
what did they really imagine? Desperately, I would have sought
out Diogenes the Cynic, who would have laughed in my face and
made a hateful comment. No, do not be afraid that I might idealise
these gentlemen. Even Hipparchia, one of the few ladies amongst
the ancient philosophers about whom something is known, is not
someone I would put on a pedestal.
Here, I am at a safe distance. The distance is great enough to proceed
selectively and filter out the good, sensible and interesting ideas.
≤

‘Do not be a slave to your feelings! Use your common sense, go your
own way, and pursue what is good for yourself and others’.
No one can take that away from me.
Not even Zeus, according to Epictetus.R

All things occur as a result of inevitability. The purpose of action is rest,
which is not identical with pleasure, as some have misinterpreted, but a
state in which the soul progresses in calmness and strength, unperturbed
by fear or superstition or any other emotion.E
I have discovered many interesting things about Democritus. He is
one of my favourites—although I know that the picture that I have
of someone can be very different to how that person was in reality.
Would I have liked him? And would I have liked Zeno, the founder
of Stoicism? Would I have got on well with these gentlemen? For
many modern thinkers, these are totally irrelevant questions. Not
14

15

II
THE EARLY STOA

Zeno
The founder of the Stoic school is Zeno of Citium. (Zenoon of
Kition. Kition/Citium is now called Larnaca and is a city in Cyprus.)
Zeno lived from approximately 334 BC to 262 BC. He came from a
Phoenician, i.e. a Semitic background, and according to descriptions was dark-skinned. He obtained a Greek education from his
father, who was apparently a rich merchant, and spoke extremely
good Greek. On his twenty-first birthday, Zeno ended up in Athens.
This must have been around 312 BC.
≤

Centuries later (around 300 AD) Diogenes Laërtius wrote in his
informative and entertaining book Lives and Opinions of Eminent
Philosophers’ of how Zeno came to be in Athens and decided to
remain there: he was shipwrecked on a journey from Phoenicia to
Peiraios (Piraeus) with a cargo of Tyrian purple dye. He also described how Zeno met Crates the Cynic: reading about Socrates in
a bookshop (which sold scrolls), he asked enthusiastically where
people like him could still be found;—just at that moment Crates
walked past, and the bookshop owner said: ‘Follow that man’. He
described how Zeno became a student of Crates because he ‘showed a strong inclination towards philosophy, although with too
much innate modesty to adapt to the shamelessness of the Cynics’.
It appeared that Zeno’s father, a rich merchant who often went to
16

Athens, had already brought back many books about Socrates for
Zeno when he was a child. So it was not surprising that Zeno visited
a bookshop immediately after he himself arrived in Athens.
≤

In this way, Zeno became a student of Crates. Crates was part of
the Cynic school (Kunikoi),Q just as his self-opinionated partner, the
philosopher HipparchiaW and the notorious Diogenes, who lived in
a large ceramic jar. The first philosopher of the Cynic school was
Antisthenes, one of the pupils of Socrates. Kunikoi/Cynics couldn’t
care less about anything that smacked of status, decency and excess.
Their way of life, focussing on frugality, autarchy and nonconformism, was very similar to what is nowadays called ‘individual
anarchism’. They were very down-to-earth and wanted nothing to
do with the Sophists’ bragging about knowledge, Plato’s search for
the Essence, or Aristotle’s pursuit of moderation. (More about the
Cynics can be found in Chapter X.) Zeno was for a long time a pupil
of Crates. He had a lot of admiration for him and later wrote a book
about him.
≤

Zeno wrote many books. At a young age, while he was a pupil of
Crates, he wrote (just like Plato, but very differently) a book with
the name Politeia (The Republic), about the ideal city, a city of wise
practitioners of philosophy, who needed no laws and lived in great
friendship with each other.
In fact, Politeia is effectively an outline of the ideal society, in other
words, a utopia. It is a utopia in the sense of ‘maybe not (entirely)
achievable but nevertheless worth aiming towards’.There is a substantial difference between what was written in Zeno’s Politeia and
the Stoic political philosophy as written in later times by Cicero,
amongst others. At least, it appears to be so—as already noted, all
that remains of it comes from quotations from other authors. The
original Politeia of Zeno has been lost, just as with all his other
works.

17

≤

The young Zeno therefore began as a Cynic, but was more refined,
cultural and theoretical than the other Cynics. His Politeia was in
any case largely Cynic in approach, and by no means all of the ideas
from it were adopted by later Stoics.
Ideas arising from the Cynics which Zeno did adopt included, for
example, ideas about world citizenship: we are all citizens of one
and the same notional city; borders are unnatural; origin, birth,
class and sex are totally unimportant; there is no worldwide state
but decisions are made by morally responsible people. There is just
one community, humanity; and one country, the cosmos. All people
are world citizens, kosmopolitoi.These ideas are explained further in
Chapter VI (friendship and cosmopolitanism). Other ideas of Zeno
and other representatives of the Early Stoa are described in Chapters
III (nature), IV (feelings) and V (goodness and happiness). First of
all, though, it is worth saying more about Zeno’s Politeia.
≤

Zeno’s Politeia goes right against the established order. Zeno spoke
out against money, temples, courts, laws, statues and schools. He
was in favour of free love, and saw marriage as a dangerous institution because of jealousy and other possessive feelings; he believed
bringing up and educating children should be done collectively,
Zeno found ordinary upbringing worthless. A good person is worth
more than a king; all good people are friends with each other.
Sexual contact should take place on the basis of friendship, love and
mutual agreement. Men and women would wear the same clothes,
and no specific parts of the body needed to be kept covered.
≤

In contrast to the ideals prevalent in Sparta and the ideals of
Plato, Zeno’s ‘Ideal City’ was not militaristic. Diogenes the Cynic
had already spoken about the uselessness of weapons; Zeno and
Chrysippus agreed with this. The only battle worth fighting, according to them, was the battle to achieve happiness and wisdom.
Instead of pointlessly fighting, we would be better off living in
agreement with nature, and living happily. And Crates said that the
18

people’s ‘knapsacks’ contained no weapons but thyme, garlic, figs
and bread. Therefore, they do not fight wars!
≤

Zeno’s Politeia was much shorter than that of Plato: he covered
less subjects, and dealt with them much more simply. Simplicity is
Zeno’s recipe for goodness and harmony.Harmony is a key concept
in Zeno’s Politeia, and friendship is the key to well-being in the
city. As a result, no laws are necessary, no strategic complications
or military organisation, no need for an absolute ruler, not even a
philosophical regulator ...
≤

Freedom is understood primarily by Zeno (and other Stoics) as the
power of independent/autonomous action. This includes moral
freedom, the freedom to think and feel what you want; this is the
freedom that everyone can grab for themselves in all situations. In
a world of wise people where everything is organised on the basis of
friendship, as Zeno outlined in his Politeia, there is also social freedom. Neither tyranny nor subjection occurs in such a world.
≤

Who would live in such a city? For wise Stoics, living together
peaceably would not be a problem: they are all concerned with arete
(virtuousness) and with living well. They do their best. It is a society
based on harmony. They do not need laws. For the wise, then… But,
how do you become wise? These ideals would be utterly infeasible
unless people drastically changed their ways of feeling, thinking
and acting. In the Classical period, Zeno’s Politeia was seen as incorrigibly utopian, for example, by Plutarch (ca. 50-125). PhilodemusE
described it as an ‘impossible hypotheses for nonexistent people’!
Even the Stoics themselves admitted that it was ambitious: a community of good and wise people, yet such people are rarer than ‘the
Ethiopian phoenix’—a mythological creature.
≤

Many Stoics from the Middle Stoa and the Late (Roman) Stoa did
19

not appreciate Zeno’s Cynic ideas, neglecting his Politeia or dismissing it as a youthful work. One Athenodorus, a bookshop owner
in Pergamon (who was later friends with Cato the Younger) even
removed all the passages from Zeno’s books which he did not like.
Luckily he was discredited and the passages were replaced. A welcome bonus is that one Cassius, a Sceptic, quoted these passages in
indignation, so that it is possible to trace to some extent what was
in Zeno’s Politeia.
≤

Zeno’s utopia is ambitious, but the basic principle that goodness
(and therefore wisdom) can be learnt was maintained by later Stoics.
The famous trio of Socrates, Plato and Aristotle also thought that
way. Human ‘evil’, from that point of view (which I share), is actually ‘only’ a type of failure, and boils down to a lack of knowledge.
≤

Frugality, practicality, ideas about equality of all people, the cosmopolitan attitude and the honesty of the Cynics were all correct
according to Zeno. But apparently he eventually felt something was
missing. In contrast to the Cynics, Zeno was not averse to theory; he
wanted to underpin ethics by using logic and physics. He became a
pupil of another philosopher, Stilpo of Megara, and regularly visited the Akademeia (Academy), the building where Plato’s philosophy
was taught, where he followed lessons of Polemon and Xenocrates.
He also visited Theophrastos, the successor to Artistotle. (He could
not have met Aristotle himself, as he was around 50 years older
than Zeno and had already died before Zeno arrived in Athens.)
However, Zeno did not like the great metaphysical theories of Plato
and Aristotle. One day he started out on his own, resulting in the
philosophy that we nowadays call ‘Stoicism’.

Athenian hangout from 300 BC! Whether he managed to inspire
street kids or their older equivalents, I have no idea.
≤

Some people suspect that Zeno was partly influenced by Asian
thinkers. That is quite possible. Connections can indeed be made
between Stoicism and Asian philosophies. Undoubtedly, people
from different regions have always inspired and influenced each
other. But at the same time it is entirely possible that people in different times and places in the world can arrive at the same line of
reasoning.
≤

Zeno clearly constructed his theories on epistemology (the theory
of knowledge) and logic, partly under the influence of the thinkers already mentioned. His theory of nature relates back to that
of Heraclitus (ca. 530-470) to a large extent. Zeno appears to have
gone to work pragmatically, free of ties to others’ ideas. In the
initial phase of Stoicism there was plenty of space for criticism and
controversy, both internal (such as the ‘dropout’ Aristo, described
later) and with other schools of philosophy, for example with
Arcesilaus from the Platonic Akademeia. For Zeno and his pupils,
these critiques undoubtedly sparked a lot of internal discussion and
adjustments of theories.
≤

From the book titles listed by Diogenes Laërtius, it can be seen that
Zeno was a multi-faceted person. Here is a selection: On passions, On
Greek education, On the universe, Pythagorean doctrines, General things,
On poetical readings, Homeric problems, Solutions and Refutations,
Ethics.

≤

≤

Because as a ‘foreigner’ he was not allowed to own buildings or
land, he gave his lectures walking back and forth in the Stoa Poikilè,R
a painted colonnade. According to Diogenes Laërtius, he also did
this to ‘stop it becoming a gathering place for idle people’. An

According to stories, Zeno died as befits a Stoic: without protest,
fear or lamentation. One day, when leaving his school, he tripped
over and broke his toe. He quoted an appropriate line of poetry,
then held his breath and died.In any case, Zeno was highly appre-

20

21

ciated by Athenians. His moderateness was proverbial: ‘Even more
moderate than the philosopher Zeno’. He liked green figs and sunbathing. But more than anything he liked philosophy, and also, I
think, his friends. One of them would become his successor.
Cleanthes
Cleanthes of Assos (ca. 331-232) was the one who took over Zeno’s
teaching in the colonnade after his death. He had been a boxer and
arrived in Athens with just four drachmas to his name, according
to Diogenes Laërtius. He must have been a diligent worker. To earn
a living, he worked nights watering gardens, and philosophised in
the daytime! Diogenes Laërtius also attributestens of book titles
to Cleanthes. The only one of his texts that has been preserved is a
hymn to Zeus—it is said that he gave a somewhat religious twist to
Zeno’s ideas. This is not obvious from the list of book titles given by
Diogenes Laërtius: Of love, Of freedom, Of knowledge, Of beauty,
Of friendship, On the thesis that virtue is the same in man and in
woman , and many others—and it is true, also the title Of the gods.
During the time that Cleanthes led the school, some pupils dropped
out, and a number of these started as philosophers by themselves.
Aristo (or Ariston) was one of them. He placed more emphasis on
Cynic values, such as autarchy. (More about him appears in Chapter
V.)
Chrysippus
Chrysippus of Soli (ca. 280-205), who took over the reins after
Cleanthes, was initially a long-distance runner. He was highly gifted and began his philosophy studies at the Platonic Akademeia. He
possibly was a pupil of Zeno but certainly of Cleanthes, to whom
he apparently said at one point: ‘Put forward your propositions and
I will furnish proof of them.’ He was therefore very self-willed and
soon began to give lessons himself.
Chrysippus is called the second founder of Stoicism; just as Zeno
he wrote a Politeia (Republic), and he significantly extended Stoic
theory. He wrote a large number of books: more than seven hund22

red, according to Diogenes Laërtius, and it can be seen from the
titles alone that he was a thorough scholar. To name just a few: The
philosopher’s inquiries, Of judgments which are not simple, On temporal judgments, A contribution to the subject of consequents, Epitome of
interrogation and inquiry, Of anomalous words or phrases, Introduction
to the study of ambiguities, To those who maintain that the premises of
‘mentiens’ (liars) are false, Of formed state, or habit, of mind, Definitions
of the good or virtuous, Of the use of reason, Of the good or morally beautiful and pleasure . And many more—but all of the original texts have
been lost.
≤

The philosopher Martha Nussbaum called Chrysippus one of the
most creative and influential philosophers of the western tradition:
he invented propositional logic and the philosophy of language,
produced a theory on ethical choices, and propagated ideas about
natural law and natural laws, which are still used in politics; moreover, he developed Zeno’s ideas about affections and produced ‘one
of the most interesting analyses of emotion ever’.T
≤

Chrysippus was often occupied with logic and came up with,
amongst other things, the following: ‘If you never lost something,
you have it still; but you never lost horns, ergo you have horns.’
and: ‘If you say something, it passes through your lips: now you say
wagon, consequently a wagon passes through your lips.’Y But apart
from this he was undoubtedly very serious—although according to
some sources he apparently died in a fit of laughter.
≤

Zeno, Cleanthes and Chrysippus are considered the three most
important representatives of the Early Stoa. Some of the other
names that are cited by Diogenes Laërtius are the already-mentioned Aristo (who split away), Dionysius (‘the unfaithful’) and
Persaeus, who Zeno lived together with. After Chrysippus, the
school became more pragmatic, so that the Stoic ideas became more
accessible to ‘ordinary people’. Should we see this as a weakening
23

or as an improvement? That issue is considered later; but first, more
about the original teachings.

III
KNOWLEDGE, NATURE, COSMOS,
LOGOS

Stoic theory consisted of far more than the practical, ethical ideas
which I largely restrict myself to in this book. The Early Stoics compared philosophy to an orchard: logic they saw as the enclosure,
physics as the trees and ethics as the fruit. Ethics, according to them,
therefore arose from the other components of Stoic philosophy:
physics and logic. Their concept of logic was very broad; epistemology (theory of knowledge) was an important part of it.
≤

Although parts of this physics, logic and epistemology remain
interesting, I find quite a lot of it not very robust. I also do not need
to use most of it in order to arrive at an ethical theory that is very
similar to that of the Early Stoics. Nevertheless, in this chapter I
would like to give a brief sketch of these components of the Stoic
‘orchard’.The core ideas of it are: the universe is a closed and eternal
cyclical system; everything is material, including the soul; the universe is permeated with rationality and everything that occurs in it
has some purpose.
Chrysippus said that bedbugs were useful because they wake us up, as
are mice, because they prompt us to be tidy.Q

24

25

≤

The Stoics were the first to develop a complete philosophy (‘of everything’). In their logic, they built on the syllogisms of Aristotle;
they developed propositional logic. Stoic epistemology is very
interesting, and it is notable that it includes Sceptic features—this
is remarkable because Sceptics and Stoics were fierce opponents of
each other in classical times.
In their epistemology, the philosophers of the Early Stoa distinguished between four things: impressions (from senses), assent (accepting impressions), endeavour (desires, passions) and reason. Assent
is an important part of this. It makes thinking an active process in
which you can intervene.
Only once the ‘leading part of the soul’ gives its assent to the information coming in from the senses does something become a recognised
object.W

what is impossible is impossible; what has happened is fixed; it is an
illusion to think that things could have happened differently.
≤

In contrast to the equally deterministic atomist Democritus, the
Stoics thought that matter was infinitely divisible. The Stoics also
thought that empty space did not exist. Even the smallest components of matter were, according to Zeno and other Early Stoics, connected to each other via ‘sympathy’.
≤

Because of this connection, and because everything is permeated
with logos, there is cohesion between all things. In living beings,
logos manifests itself in different ways: plants can grow, animals can
feel and people can think. In people, logos, reason, is expressed at a
high level, according to the Stoics.

≤

≤

The world view of the Stoics is monistic and materialistic, and contains many ideas from Heraclitus and Empedocles. The Stoics saw
the world as deterministic, with no room for chance, but instead an
endless evolution. Material, they thought, consisted of passive raw
materials that are permeated by activity. They called this activity
logos. Logos was the same as universal reason, but could also manifest itself as creative fire; logos also stood for the laws governing
materials, for nature in the broad sense of the word, for providence,
fate and Zeus.

Everything is connected. This is also true for the human world; this
is why many Stoics were greatly involved in world affairs. Individual
happiness and the well-being of the rest of the world go together.

≤

Although the passive component of material was subject to change,
and therefore transitory, this logos was indestructible.
≤

They saw the world (the cosmos) not only as an entity consisting
purely of material, where events occur by cause and effect, but
also as an entity in which everything happens entirely rationally.
Important in their ethics is deduction: everything is the way it is;
26

≤

Stoic physics led to an attitude to life that was about living according to nature, which in the case of people, according to the Stoics,
boiled down to living according to reason. This is the highest virtue,
the only way for people to become really happy. This is only possible
if the soul is free from passions.
≤

Cleanthes said: ‘A wise man is at one with Nature, because he believes that what Nature wants is the best for the great Whole’.And
Chrysippus: ‘If the foot could think, it would want to step into
mud’.E
≤

The Stoics saw the Whole, the cosmos, as a great intelligent living
27

being (that they sometimes called nature and sometimes cosmos,
Zeus or logos), of which we people are just tiny parts that cannot
observe the Whole. They considered it damaging if you opposed
the situation you find yourself in (because of wrong ideas and the
strong or nagging feelings that accompany them). Damaging, that
is, for the Whole, but mostly for yourself, because whether you
voluntarily went with the flow of events or strongly fought against
them, the flow still carries you along. Grumbling just makes you
unhappy, so why should you do that?

≤

Looking after yourself well is totally logical, from the Stoic perspective. By considering the cosmos as a whole, and using general
concepts such as ‘nature’, a more sensible kind of thinking is stimulated. Less subjective, less egoistical. If the universe is one large
organism, then there is no difference between self-interest and collective interest, except that ‘self’ is closer to me.

≤

The following quote gives a good impression of the Stoic theory of
nature and reason. Nature is oriented towards use and enjoyment.
(…) when in the case of living beings an instinct is included through
which they are able to obtain suitable nutrition, then Nature must as
a rule follow this instinct, according to the Stoics. But when reason by
way of a more perfect leadership has been bestowed on the beings we call
rational, for them life according to reason rightly becomes the natural
life. For reason supervenes to shape impulse scientifically.R
Animals always live according to nature, just as plants, but for
them, life is considerably simpler. Because of their powers of thought, people (that is, adults with well-functioning brains) have more
options available. Part of human nature is that humans can learn.
Things can go wrong precisely because of this, since people do not
use their learning abilities optimally—they can also learn ‘wrong’
things (for example, because of upbringing or cultural influences).
Fighting against events, as mentioned above, is an example. It is
therefore important for everyone to learn to use reason.
≤

An animal’s first impulse, say the Stoics, is to self-preservation (...) for
it was not likely that nature should estrange the living thing from itself
(...) for so [the animal] comes to repel all that is injurious and give free
access to all that is serviceable or akin to it.T
28

29

IV
FEELINGS ARE JUDGMENTS

mind and body. They tried to inure themselves against pain. Zeno
found this gave too much credit to pain, making it important again.
The goal is not to withstand pain or eliminate it, but the undisturbed pursuit of insight, wisdom, good life and getting the best out
of yourself.
≤

‘Emotions are judgments’, wrote Chrysippus in one of his works—
which again is currently seen as a ‘very modern’ viewpoint.
Chrysippus provided a few good examples of this: ‘avarice being
a supposition that money is a good, while the case is similar with
drunkenness and profligacy and all the other emotions’Q (By ‘profligacy’ I take him to mean ‘seeking momentary pleasure’.)
≤

Both strong feelings (fear, anger) and less strong but nevertheless
unpleasant feelings (gloominess, discontent) disrupt reasoning and
therefore happiness. Euphoria, being out of your senses with enthusiasm, likewise disrupts reasoning, just as does being strongly and
painfully in love, and of course jealousy, pride, honour and hatred;
all excessive or nagging feelings disrupt good and pleasant life,
peace and happiness. However, because feelings are judgments (or
consequences of judgments), these consequences/judgments can be
reconsidered through knowledge and insight.
≤

The aim was not insensitivity, but a situation in which you are not
carried along by passions. This is a logical consequence of the Stoic
principle that rationality is the most valuable thing in this universe.
Passions, strong feelings (themselves the consequence of thinking/
judging) disturb thoughts and reflections. People who have the gift
of reason and use reason optimally, which means that they do not
allow themselves to be carried along by strong feelings or unpleasant affectations, live in agreement with nature, according to the
Early Stoics. Just as a plant grows towards sunlight, it is natural for
humans to make full use of reason.
≤

For Early Stoa philosophers, the key is to reconsider ‘irrational
and unnatural movements of the soul’ and ‘exaggeration, excessively strong feelings and endeavours’. This involves counteracting
‘loose’ thinking whereby ‘incorrect judgments’ such as greed, fear
and other undesirable affectations emerge. Striving and wishing are
not wrong by themselves; they are behaviours that are ‘natural’ for
humans, just like thinking.
≤

Because passion is a bad and uncontrolled form of reasoning, resulting
from an inferior and false judgment that has also become intense and
powerful …W

It is often said that Stoics strived for apatheia, meaning lack of passions or a specific form of peace of mind, but this word is nowhere to
be found, it seems, in the works of Zeno, Cleanthes or Chrysippus.
However, it was used by the Cynics, by Aristotle and some others,
such as Stilpo, who for a time was Zeno’s teacher. For the Cynics
and Stilpo, apatheia meant something like insensitivity, both of

Chrysippus, who as mentioned above had been a long-distance runner, compared those who allowed themselves to be carried along by
feelings with runners who run off in such a way that they can no
longer stop or change direction. It is about not going off the rails
and learning to think reasonably, by trial and error. The Stoics did

30

31

not find all feelings objectionable, as can be seen from their appreciation of eupatheiai, good feelings.
Once strong (or nagging) feelings are out of the way, there is space
for these good, pleasant feelings. Someone who manages to break
through the notions behind jealousy and considers better notions can once again feel love. Someone who manages to alter the
judgments behind his or her anger can once again feel concern for
someone else.
A basic state of mind for Stoics is cheerfulness, euthymia. This good
feeling also had an important role for the atomist Democritus. This
is really a happy, cheerful state of mind. This is a step further than
apatheia, ‘unperturbedness’ and ‘peace of mind’, expressions which
are often used to describe the Stoic art of life.
≤

According to Zeno, the affections can be divided into four categories: enjoyment, desire, sorrow and fear. Enjoyment consists of the
judgment that something is ‘good’, and desire consists of seeking
future ‘good’. ‘Sorrow’ (or pain, or displeasure)E consists of the
judgment that something is ‘bad’, and fear is about expecting something ‘bad’.
All affections can now be divided into these categories. Hatred is, for
example, ‘a growing and lasting desire or craving that it should go
ill with somebody’ (desire); ‘shame is fear of disgrace’ (fear); ‘rivalry,
pain at the possession by another of what one has oneself’ (displeasure); ‘malevolent joy is pleasure at another’s ills’ (pleasure).R
≤

Longing for fame, preference for superficial pleasure and amusement, touchiness and similar affections were compared in Early
Stoic debates to bodily afflictions. Just as the body can suffer from
having a cold or diarrhoea, so can the ‘soul’ be affected by jealousy,
annoyance and suchlike. Grief is the ‘curling up of the soul’.

32

V
GOODNESS, BEAUTY AND
HAPPINESS

The Greek word arete, which is usually translated as ‘virtue’, but
sometimes as ‘excellence’, can relate to skill or knowledge—in any
field. (In Latin: virtus.) Excellence can relate to health, wisdom—or
the beauty and perfection of a statue.
Virtue, in the first place, is in one sense the perfection of anything in
general.Q
≤

‘Virtue’ sounds rather like well-behaved to us.W For Ancient Greeks,
arete was something far more neutral: a quality, or a form of knowledge. The Stoics saw virtue as ‘rationally excellent behaviour’ that
everyone could learn.
Further, they hold that the vices are forms of ignorance of those things
whereof the corresponding virtues are the knowledge.E
≤

The four most important virtues were, according to Zeno (and Plato
and Aristotle named the same four virtues): prudence (also called
practical wisdom or insight), justice, courage and self-control (or,
dependent on the translation: moderation, frugality or sensibility).
Practical wisdom or prudence is, according to Zeno, necessary in
33

order to make ethical choices between what is ‘good’, what is ‘bad’
and what is neither. Courage is ‘knowledge of what we ought to
choose, what we ought to beware of, and what is indifferent’,R
justice is wisdom when dividing things up, and frugality or selfcontrol is wisdom when enjoying things. Wisdom is not something
in itself, according to the Early Stoics, but something which always
has a practical result. Not ‘armchair wisdom’, in other words!

when making choices, you arrive at less sensible choices that if you
use your power of reason and aim to be a good person. With pleasure, moreover, there always lurks the danger that you may crave and
desire it, and so become the slave of your desires. If that happens,
pleasure becomes overshadowed by suffering. But most of all, for
Stoics, pleasure is something quite different from happiness.

≤

Just like the Cynics, Zeno made a direct connection between happiness (eudaimonia) and virtue (arete): he saw arete not as a means
to happiness or to something else, but a goal, a goal that entirely
coincided with happiness. This has always remained one of the core
ideas of Stoic thought. The ethical idea of goodness was also called
katorthoma, ‘the beautiful’, by the Stoics.

The nature of happiness prompted many discussions in Athens in
the time of Zeno. For example, there were lots of discussions around
the question as to whether the purpose of life was enjoyment (hèdonè) or virtue (arete).
According to the Hedonist Aristippus (ca. 435-356), who like Plato
and Antisthenes was a pupil of Socrates, the ultimate purpose was
pleasure. Epicurus also asserted that, but by ‘pleasure’ he meant an
enduring, sensible type of enjoyment, and whether he meant it or
not, this came close to what the Stoics understood as ‘virtue’, in my
opinion. Zeno was active at the same time as the very influential
Epicurus—some even think that Zeno began his school as a reaction to the ideas of this philosopher. (Chapter X includes more on
Epicurus.)
Pleasure or enjoyable feelingsT did not constitute a purpose for
Stoics, in contrast to Hedonists.
≤

Happiness cannot be found by pursuing pleasure according to
Zeno, because ‘first there is the harrowing pain of longing, then the
melancholy slump following satisfaction.’ Not very tempting.
He had already become almost proverbial for his moderation; it was said
of him: ‘More temperate than Zeno the philosopher’.Y

≤

≤

Zeno used yet another term, euroia biou, ‘richly flowing life’ or
‘undisturbed stream of life’.U Stoic happiness is not a passive kind
of enjoyment, and as already noted, it is more than just peace of
mind—although that is a precondition for it.
≤

Imagine that the world would be so arranged that ‘being good’
would be rewarded with ‘having it good’. In this situation, kind,
helpful, co-operative people would be happy. People who are
only out to benefit themselves would feel unhappy. Much ‘more
honest’, don’t you think? Well, actually Stoics state frankly that
this is exactly how things are! Doing good goes together with being
happy. Thoughtless behaviour goes along with feeling unhappy.
Being happy in this sense is of course not about material riches,
not even ‘having enough to eat’, but inner riches, the only genuine
happiness.

Although Zeno, Chrysippus and others had important philosophical objections to pursuit of ‘pleasure’ as a goal, they had nothing
against pleasure by itself. From the Stoic perspective, there is no
objection to total enjoyment. However, if you only pursue pleasure

In other words, goodness is for Stoics ‘the natural perfection of a
rational being’, making use of the possibilities afforded to you by
nature, ‘getting the best out of yourself’, and a side-effect of this

34

35

≤

is: joy, a good mood, and suchlike. Evil, for them, included ‘folly,
cowardice, injustice and the like, or matters participating in what is
wrong’ and this evil was accompanied by despair, dull moods and
so on.
≤

Although in many religions the idea of justice is rendered in a reward
(or punishment) after death, the Stoics made the link between virtue
(arete) and happiness in the here and now. Perfect goodness is at the
same time perfect happiness.
≤

In short, for the Early Stoics, doing your best to live a pleasant and
good life was the only thing of importance. The motive ‘to do my
best’ is a very active attitude, and it is precisely this motive which
makes me feel happy. It feels good to do your best, to labour actively, and this is quite logical according to the Stoics, because that is
the way that nature is constituted.
≤

Everything, then, revolves around ‘doing your best’. Everything else
is ‘indifferent’, of no importance. It is neither good nor bad.
This means that the following things are unimportant: life and
death, health and illness, pleasure and pain, beauty and ugliness,
strength and weakness, wealth and poverty, good reputation and
disgrace, origin, appearance, recognition, prestige, fame and similar
things.
‘Unimportant’ here means of no importance to Stoic happiness.
≤

Whether we live long, remain healthy or will be rich or poor:
these are all indifferent matters. Specifically, however rotten my
situation, it does not mean that I cannot choose the most sensible
thoughts and deeds. I can be abused; I can be robbed; someone can
besmirch my good name; I can become ill; and so on. However limited my ability to act, it remains possible for me to get the best out of
myself, and be satisfied about doing so too. In this sense, happiness,
36

the only real happiness, ‘beauty’, is therefore always possible.
≤

Can I make my happiness entirely on my own, or am I (also) dependent on circumstances for my happiness? The Stoics reasoned as
follows: not all poor people are necessarily unhappy, and by no
means all rich people are happy. Not all sick people are unhappy,
and health is likewise no guarantee of happiness. From this it follows that these circumstances cannot be real causes of happiness or
unhappiness.
While virtue is always used in a good sense and badness in a bad sense,
health and bodily things can imply either good or bad meanings and
therefore they are undoubtedly indifferent.I
≤

Early Stoics received many comments from others, and also had
extensive discussions amongst themselves. It was proposed that
even for Stoics, health would be preferable to sickness, and wealth
to poverty, and so on. Surely saying that these things ‘are of no
importance to your happiness’ is going too far? For one pupil of
Zeno, who himself had health problems, the strict position of his
teacher about health was a reason to drop out.
Dionysius, the Renegade, declared that pleasure was the end of action;
this under the trying circumstance of an attack of ophthalmia. For so
violent was his suffering that he could not bring himself to call pain a
thing indifferent.O
Understandable. But I still find it an inspirational idea that you
can always live intensively, regardless of pain or illness, and you can
continue to obtain happiness from what you can make of your life.
Likewise, for Zeno and other philosophers of the Early Stoa, this
position related to an ideal, something to strive for. None of these
philosophers claimed the word ‘wise’ as applying to himself.

37

≤

As well as genuine goodness, correctness, beauty (katorthoma),
Stoic philosophy was expanded based on practical considerations,
undoubtedly after many discussions, to include a second type of
goodness: kathekon, appropriate behaviour. Kathekonta is sometimes
translated as ‘duty’, but means ‘appropriate behaviour’. Appropriate
behaviour is behaviour where what I do in specific circumstances is
what reason prompts me to do.
≤

A plant turns towards sunlight; this is natural for the plant and
therefore appropriate behaviour. Animals too also act in agreement with their nature, according to Stoics, so their behaviour is
appropriate. But humans have more options because of reason, and
therefore according to Early Stoics also have the options to behave
appropriately or inappropriately. Appropriate behaviour can appear
exactly the same as the behaviour of an ideal wise person, but it
does not stem from universal understanding. Reason is not used
optimally.
≤

Only a wise person acts with katorthoma, because only a wise person acts from his or her understanding as a whole. This kind of
understanding, it seems to me, is not achievable for any real person;
something will always be lacking in our knowledge. The Stoics did
consider this ideal ultimately achievable, but they also realised that
it was a lot to ask for almost everyone. But fortunately, even without perfect understanding I can still behave appropriately according to the Stoics. The difference between appropriate behaviour
and ideally good behaviour therefore boils down to a difference in
knowledge.

Imagine, for example, that I am miserable. If I nevertheless behave
in a friendly manner, this does not really count as good or beautiful,
because it does not come from correct understanding (otherwise
I would not be miserable), but behaving in a friendly manner is
sensible when living with others, so it is appropriate. Kathekon is
therefore more practical than katorthoma and arete, and is a lot easier
to reach for those who are not (perfectly) wise.
≤

Another extension and relaxation of the theory was the recognition
that some of the ‘indifferent’ things are generally preferable, while
others should generally be avoided. The pursuit of preferable, pleasant things, it was admitted, is not wrong in itself; it can be ‘appropriate’, just like the aversion to non-preferable, unpleasant things.
This pursuit is, according to the opinion of Zeno, Chrysippus and
other Stoics, a characteristic of human nature and therefore in
accordance with reason.
They maintained, however, that the positive (preferable) things in
the list (health, having enough money and suchlike) may indeed
lead to enjoyment or satisfaction, but not to happiness. They just
do not make a good person of you—and therefore not a happy
person in the Stoic sense. It is often ‘appropriate’ or ‘natural’ that
someone prefers health, wealth, etc. But these choices are not ‘good’
or ‘attractive’ in the ethical sense. So, in a strict sense, they are still
indifferent.
≤

Kathekonta, appropriate behaviour, is not the same as beauty, and therefore
the same as arete, excellence. But without the ‘correct understanding’
you can still arrive at what appears to be the same behaviour, and in
this case the behaviour is not called ‘ideally good’ but ‘appropriate’.

Aristo of Chios (ca. 320-250), a pupil of Zeno who began his own
school, saw himself as the continuation of the true Cynic tradition.
He considered the theory about preferences for particular ‘indifferent’ things rather feeble, a concession to the prevailing views.
He came up with several counterexamples.QP He maintained that
the pursuit of goodness must take place in complete indifference to
anything that is neither good nor evil. ‘The wise man he compared
to a good actor, who, if called upon to take the part of a Thersites or
of an Agamemnon, will impersonate them both becomingly.’QQ He
also diverged from the other Stoics by wanting nothing to do with

38

39

≤

physics or logic. Only ethics concerns us, according to Aristo.
≤

Chrysippus, in contrast, tried like a true scholar to create stronger
foundations for the theory of preferences. He classified preferences
into subdivisions and considered, for example, health more important than wealth. Most Stoics found health preferable—if only
because health enables one to perform many good deeds.

To put him to the test, Antigonos once arranged for false messages to be
given to him that his estate had been plundered by enemies, and when
the man showed disappointment at this, he said: ‘Can you see that
riches are not a matter of indifference?’

≤

The standpoint of Stoics on suicide followed logically from the idea
that life and death are morally indifferent things. Suicide can be
kathekon, i.e. appropriate, according to the standpoint of the Early
Stoa. The moment to end your life has arrived when you are no longer able to contribute anything that is good.
The historian Diogenes Laërtius wrote that some said Zeno died at
an advanced age by refusing food, whereas others (as I mentioned in
Chapter II) said that he stumbled on leaving his school and broke a
toe, after which he died by holding in his breath ...
Whether there is truth in either of these stories is one of the many
things that are ‘indifferent’ to us.
≤

Philosophy should ‘cure’ people of passions. If you are free of passions, and so no longer addicted to passive ‘happiness’, and without
inner contradictions, then there is a space for active, really beautiful happiness, happiness-without-excitement. Euroia biou. Zeno,
Cleanthes, Chrysippus and other Early Stoa philosophers had, just
like the Cynics, experienced personally that it is not the pursuit of
pleasure but getting the best out of yourself that makes you happy.
And because people are very similar to each other, this would be the
case for everyone.
≤

But it is not easy. Diogenes Laërtius told a story about Persaeus, a
pupil of Zeno:
40

41

VI
COSMOPOLITANISM, FRIENDSHIP
AND COEXISTENCE

Cosmopolitanism
According to the Stoics, every living being is spontaneously and
impulsively oriented towards self-preservation. Each animal experiences his/her individuality. An animal ‘knows’ what is good and
what is bad for him or her, which contributes to remaining healthy
and remaining alive. All living beings have a natural urge to appropriate the things that are useful for their continued physical existence. There is also a natural (and therefore reasonable) urge to flee
from life-threatening situations.
≤

If these urges are so strong, how do people arrive at behaviour that
is (also) directed towards the interests of others, such as justice?
Chrysippus came to the conclusion that while it is true that the first
inclination of living beings is self-preservation, animals also care
for their young. They experience the interests of their young as their
own interests, their concept of ‘I’ expands, as it were; that is where
‘justice’ begins.

used the term oikeiosis: self-ownership, the extension of the ‘I’, of
the ‘own’.
What I regard as the ‘own’, as that for which I do my best, I can
extend to larger and larger categories.
≤

In 1901, a papyrus roll was discovered at Hermopolis with an interesting text from the Stoic Hierocles, who lived in the first century AD.
This text was about this extension of the ‘own’; for this, Hierocles
used the image of ever widening concentric circles: myself—my close
family—my whole family—my neighbours and friends—my city—
the district where I live—the whole of humanity—the cosmos. It is
ultimately about treating the people in the outermost circle as we
treat ourselves and those in the innermost circle.
A Stoic thinks about the consequences of all of his or her actions for
other people, not just people that he or she sees every day, but also
all others.
≤

As an aside, animals also are of course part of the cosmos. But what
did that mean for the representatives of the Early Stoa? Chrysippus
saw justice as a thing between people, who have the power of
wisdom. His reasoning here was clearly different to that of the
Aristotelian Theophrastos (ca. 370-286),Q who found that, on the
basis of kinship and likeness, people not only have responsibilities
to people with different skin colours and from different places, but
also to animals. Theophrastos was an early supporter of animal
rights!
≤

The ‘I’ or the ‘own’ can expand, by a little for animals, but by a lot
more for humans, who are gifted with reason. For this, the Stoics

Another important aside. Justice for all people also meant for the
Stoics that all people (men and women, rich and poor) are equal,
and so are equally important. In Athens in the time of the Early
Stoa, however, a large part of the population consisted of slaves.
How they were treated depended on their ‘master’ or ‘mistress’.
It would also have made a great difference whether you had been
appointed as a ‘house slave’, which often amounted to being a ser-

42

43

≤

vant, or whether you as a slave had to toil and sweat in the mines.
What was the Early Stoics’ attitude to slavery? This is not entirely
clear to me. On one hand their conception of justice must lead to
the rejection of slavery and other forms of exploitation; on the other
hand, their theory of moral indifference meant they would have to
state that it is totally indifferent whether you were a slave, a king or
an ordinary citizen.
Aristotle (who in contrast to the Stoics did not see slaves as equal to
citizens) had already said: ‘No one can get a slave to share in happiness, unless he also gets him to share in the life of a free man’. A
logically consistent Stoic should, however, say that a slave can be
happy (because circumstances are not relevant), but the slave-owner
cannot (because he or she divides people into slaves and non-slaves,
i.e. is unjust, because all people are equal).
In their philosophy the Stoics were nevertheless clear in saying that
(in essence) there are no slaves, neither from birth nor from customs,
and that a (so-called) slave was equal to a citizen, a king or any
other person. The only classification that was important was that
between the wise, in other words the really free people, and the nonwise people, in other words the unfree people, who could be called
‘slaves’ in this sense. Almost everyone belongs to this last group, as
noted above.
‘Deal with your slave as with a friend’, was said by the Stoics. But
isnt ‘immediately setting them free’ part of this?
In any case, by stating their opinions on the equality of all people,
the Stoics stimulated discussion of slavery and thereby brought the
abolition of this ‘barbarity’ a step closer.
≤

The Stoics were not the first to adopt a cosmopolitan standpoint.
‘Which country do you come from?’ asked the inhabitants of
ancient Athens to each other. Several philosophers gave wise answers to this. Even Socrates described himself as ‘an inhabitant of
the world’. Diogenes of Sinope, the Cynic, is however seen as the
first cosmopolitan. He called himself an inhabitant of the cosmos,
a world citizen; he recognised no borders and rejected the inconvenience of separate city-states and countries. His pupil Crates said in
44

the same spirit: ‘I do not have a city or home as my fatherland. The
entire universe is my city, my home.’ And when Alexander asked
Crates if he wanted his home city to be rebuilt, he said: ‘Why should
it be? Perhaps another Alexander will destroy it again.’W
≤

This cosmopolitan attitude was maintained by Zeno. The Stoics
started from the connectedness of all aspects of reality, and between
all people (of all classes, races and peoples, although saying this
ends discussion about different peoples).
The Stoics emphasised general human characteristics rather than
those commonly cited in Ancient Greek society that were based on
the supposed excellence of the Greek people.
≤

Zeno, incidentally, gave a different emphasis to cosmopolitanism
than Diogenes. For Diogenes, in the first place it was about independence, autarkeia. For Zeno, the emphasis was on the worldwide
community of wise people.E Everyone could be a part of this, but as
we have seen, it was not at all easy! In the Later Stoa, the emphasis
shifted slightly, falling primarily on the equality and connectedness
of all people.
≤

Cosmopolitanism implies that foreigners do not exist. There are
people who speak other languages, but these languages are not to
be called ‘gibberish’ and their speakers are not ‘barbarians’. You certainly do not keep them captive as slaves or exploit or exclude them
in other ways.
People who come from another region are to be considered equals
and friends, and borders do not exist. Differences on the basis of
culture, class, gender, skin colour, language, etc. either do not
exist are or not important. The differences that do matter can all be
expressed in terms of good or bad intentions. Stoics can be seen as
the first humanists, the first people who spoke in terms of humans
as belonging together as a species.
45

≤

Cosmopolitanism is a position concerning humanity as a whole,
which mainly brings to mind the outermost of the concentric circles. Further in amongst these circles, the aspiration to extend the
concept of ‘own’ is called ‘friendship’.
Friendship
To the question ‘Who is a friend?’ his answer was, ‘A second self (alter
ego).’R
Friendship has a special place in Stoic ethics. For other Ancient
Greek philosophers such as Aristotle and Epicurus, friendship was
also an important subject, and although there are similarities between their views, there are also differences. For Stoics, friendship
was bound to cosmopolitanism; there is no need to know a friend
personally. People can be connected by reason, by agreement in
thinking. This can happen with people nearby, but also with people
from far away. (And I would add: with contemporary people and
people from earlier times.)
For Epicurus, friendship was about usefulness and the enjoyment
friends can obtain from each other. The Stoics did not consider these
good motives; for them, friendship was an aim in itself. In this sense
they considered friendship a virtue—but of course this applied to
a good friendship, ideally between wise people, and naturally the
virtuous part involved ‘giving’ friendship, not receiving it. They
considered friendship as an activity in which someone does not take
up a position of dependency, not weighing up whether they will get
enough appreciation in return.
The Stoics probably found it problematic to consider friendship as a
virtue (excellence), because ‘friendships’ can exist between unwise or
‘bad’ people (though they see these as sham friendships).

human beings as social animals. Via the shared use of reason, people
all over the world can eventually become friends with each other.
≤

For Epicurus, friendship was (as mentioned above) also of greatest importance, but this was about a philosophical community
of friends. He expressed no desire to expand the circle of friends,
certainly not to the whole world. In this respect, Epicurus seemed
to have much less confidence than the Stoics in the ability of each
person to be a good person.
For Aristotle, who also wrote about friendship, it did not involve a
closed group as with Epicurus, but it was also not about friendship
between all people as with the Stoics. He remained, as befitted
Aristotle, a pursuer of realistic goals. But he did consider friendship
between good people to be perfect.
≤

The Stoics saw love as a special, intensive form of friendship: friendship with tenderness. Without friendship there can be no love.
Friendship and love can be ‘useful’, or give enjoyment, but these are
welcome side-effects; use and enjoyment never comprise the aim of
friendship or love. Friendship (and thus love as well) is always an
aim in itself, because it is beautiful and good to love each other and
be friends with each other. Others, or the other, are seen as ‘another
I’.
≤

Friendship is considered as a form of (ethical) beauty, at least in the
case of friendship between wise people. Friendships between ordinary people are in any case considered ‘suitable’, as Stoics consider

Eros played a large and very positive role in Zeno’s Politeia. Later
Stoics or half-Stoics such as Cicero strongly criticised Zeno’s support for eros. Cicero considered eros the most dangerous of all passions. Plutarch, however, thought that with eros, Zeno did not mean
bodily passion but moral love.
For me, it seems that most probably Zeno meant both bodily attraction and moral love. He did not consider eros as a passion, but as a
way to become friends and express friendship and love. The Early
Stoics, as noted above, had nothing against bodily enjoyment, as
long as it is regarded as something additional and not as an end in

46

47

≤

itself. Zeno saw eros perhaps as a connection between people that is
natural and whose form individuals can shape together, physically
or otherwise.
≤

Friendship begins with yourself. If you can be friends with yourself,
you can also be friends with someone else. This is simply expanding
the concentric circles around the dot that is you. Self-love is natural
and therefore normal, and has nothing to do with egoism.
≤

Just as with the entire Stoic attitude to life, friendship is an active
pursuit. The emphasis is on making friendship, on ‘what can I give
to the other(s)’ and not on the question whether I ‘will get enough
in return’. If I get friendship ‘in return’, which is quite likely, then
it is ‘a bonus’.
≤

As already noted, none of Zeno’s writings have survived, only
some quotations from them. And these are often quotations in the
sense of: ‘Look what he just said!’ But these ideas are mostly not
that crazy. They are challenging precisely because of their extreme
nature, such as: ‘True friendships is only possible between the wise’.
This is the case according to Zeno, because true friendship is only
generated by good. And for the same reasons, all wise people are by
definition friends.
Thus: if friendship does not work out, a Stoic cannot dismiss this
with a weak ‘we don’t suit each other’. No, the conclusion must be
that at least one of the two lacks ‘goodness’, in other words that at
least one is unwise. There is a strong chance, of course, that this is
true for both.
≤

dom (in the sense of good intentions); wouldn’t that be disturbing?
It is better to base friendship on wisdom than on something formal
such as trust or something nasty such as fear—as too often happens.
Genuine friendship is free of formalities, and certainly free of fear.
≤

Friendship is, according to Zeno, based on similarity in thinking
and in ways of life. This similarly is of course based only on important things. All that counts is someone’s intention to do his or her
best to achieve good things. Such people are naturally friends of
each other.
≤

All in all, Stoics see humans not only as beings guided by reason but
also as social beings. Wise Stoics are politically committed and do
their best to improve society.T
Coexistence
There were also statements made by Stoics about (peaceful) coexistence. ‘The wise need no laws’. This idea had already been put forward
more than once. Xenocrates (of the Akademeia, the school of Plato,
(ca. 396-314 BC) asserted: ‘Those who sincerely pursue wisdom do
voluntarily what others are forced to do by law’. And Aristippus (the
Hedonist mentioned earlier) said in the same vein: ‘If all laws were
abolished, we philosophers would continue our lives unchanged’.
Zeno wrote in his Politeia: ‘Those who are not wise cannot form
a state; only a state of the wise deserves our interest’.Y In Plato’s
Politeia (Republic), the city is governed by wise people (men and
women); in Zeno’s Politeia everyone is wise and no one rules over
others. The wise need no rulers and no laws, because wise people act
in well-considered ways, on the basis of their own understanding.
This is Zeno’s ultimate ideal: a world commune of the wise.

All of this has been thought of from a very radical ideal: all wise
people are friends, wisdom is in principle possible for everyone, and
therefore friendship is in principle possible between everyone. Isn’t
that beautiful? Imagine that friendship had nothing to do with wis-

Only the wise are free, because only the wise are capable of behaving
independently. The other people are slaves of their own passions.

48

49

≤

But they also rejected being ruled over by other people and ruling
over people themselves:
Indeed there is also a second form of slavery consisting in subordination,
and a third which implies possession of the slave as well as his subordination; the correlative of such servitude being lordship; and this too is
evil.U
≤

Just as with Plato, in Zeno’s ideal women are equal to men, and
people live in communes of a sort, with a free choice of partners, so
that jealousy is prevented, and children can be brought up collectively in a loving environment.I
≤

On the basis of criticism of various positions that Plato had put forward
in The Laws, Zeno designed a sketch of this ideal state which, since
money, law courts etc. were superfluous and even marriage as a fixed
institution did not exist, showed strong anarchist tendencies.O
≤

Zeno clearly liked to make radical statements: ‘only the wise know
happiness’ (instead of: ‘the wise know the most beautiful form of
happiness’); ‘only between the wise can friendship exist’ (instead of
‘friendship between the wise is the most beautiful form of friendship’); ‘only the wise can be cosmopolitan’ (instead of ‘if the concept
of cosmopolitanism appeals to you, you are to some extent wise’).
For him, ‘a bit wise’ simply did not exist.
Because the emphasis was later changed, it seems the sting was taken
out of some of his opinions. Zeno may come across as extreme with
statements like ‘the thinker is happy, even on the torture rack’, but
precisely because of this, his ideas represent a powerful challenge.
≤

Chrysippus defended the ‘Cynicism’ of Zeno but was somewhat
more pragmatic, saying that while the ideal state of wise people
does not yet exist, wise people still ought to take part in public life.
50

By doing so, they can in any case exercise some good influence. All
the same, he did not place great importance in getting involved in
politics. The Stoic, Antipater (see Chapter VII) saw care for one’s
fatherland as an important duty for individuals. Fatherland and
duty: what happened to the cosmopolitan, autonomous attitude?
(Some consider this attitude of Antipater as an advancement compared to the individualism of Zeno: responsibility for others, namely countrymen/women but I consider it a degeneration compared
to the genuine cosmopolitan idea where ‘a fatherland’ only exists if
it comprises the whole world, and ‘a people’ only if it includes the
whole of humanity.)
This position is echoed in the words of Diogenes of Babylon, who
in discussion with Antipater about honesty when selling, said: ‘If
you take account of public interest, then you should not sell, but
give away’.QP
≤

Again, they say that justice, as well as law and right reason, exists by
nature and not by convention.QQ
Concepts such as justice, proper reasoning and goodness are concepts
used by people. They are very useful for people, because they form
some of the tools for human society to improve itself, and improve
the way people interact with the rest of nature. Because people are
part of nature, it is logical to say that morals (and therefore justice
and so on) arise out of nature, and therefore ‘exist naturally’. You can
also say that people’s ideas about justice rest not so much on agreements but arise from the practice of living and surviving. But for the
Stoics, the link between justice and nature was much stronger than
this. Everything that was natural was obviously also just. As noted
above, they saw the cosmos as a living being and humanity as part
of that being, and therefore as part of a rational and meaningful
universe. I, however, see no reason to attribute characteristics such
as ‘justice’ or ‘proper reasoning’ to non-human nature.
(There is more about coexistence in chapter XIV).

51

VII
MIDDLE STOA AND ROMAN STOA

conversations that the three philosophers had with each other, and
with many others, that Platonic and Peripatetic (Aristotelian) elements crept into Stoic theory. Stoicism became thus more eclectic,
and thereby ‘milder’ and attractive to more people. To my taste,
though, it also became less challenging, both for political and personal topics.
≤

According to Diogenes Laërtius, Chrysippus died at the age of
seventy-three from an uncontrollable fit of laughter after a donkey
had eaten his figs. In any case Chrysippus was followed by Zeno of
Tarsus, who in turn was followed in 204 BC by Diogenes of Babylon
(ca. 240-150 BC). The last of these departed for Rome in 156 BC
with Carneades (of the Akadèmeia) and Critolaus (of the Peripatetic
school), on an Athenian mission to ask for Athens to be exempted
from a fine imposed by Rome. They spoke in the Roman Senate,
but also in streets and squares, thereby generating a lot of interest
in Greek philosophy. From this, it can be inferred that the relationships between these three schools, or at least between these three
people, who disagreed on many points, were not hostile. I would
be intrigued to know what conversations they had with each other
during their journey.
≤

These three men represented three of the four most important philosophical schools of Athens at that time: the Stoa, the Akadèmeia
(Plato) and the Lukeion/Lyceum (Aristotle). The fourth school,
Kèpos, the Garden, of Epicurus, did not take part in the journey.
The ‘Garden-goers’ wanted nothing to do with politics—that being
the reason for their absence.Q
≤

At some point the Early Stoa became the Middle Stoa, but where
should the boundary be drawn? Perhaps, as some classicists suggest,
this journey of Diogenes of Babylon to Rome would be a good
point.
Antipater
After Diogenes of Babylon, Antipater (Antipatros) of Tarsus (ca. 200129 BC) took over the reins of Stoicism. He was a contemporary of
Carneades of the Akadèmeia, which in the meantime had become
very Sceptic and strongly criticised the Stoics. Antipater did not take
part in verbal polemics; he preferred to express himself in writing,
and was therefore called ‘Pen-noise’.W After he died, Panaetius of
Rhodes (ca. 185 - 110 BC) took over the reins from him.
≤

The Stoics of this time placed more emphasis on the route taken
to reach their ideals. You do not have to be either wise or foolish;
something in between is perfectly possible. By this, the emphasis
increasingly came to lay on kathekon (appropriate behaviour). In the
theory of kathekonta it was possible to make progress.
≤

Antipater attached great importance to dedication for others and
the Whole. The aim was to serve mankind. That was also the best
thing for each individual, because for Antipater, individual interest
and public interest were one and the same thing.

Perhaps it came about partly because of this journey and all the
52

53

Panaetius
For Antipater’s pupil Panaetius (Panaitios, ca.185-110 BC), justice
was the highest principle: all people form one great community,
connected by love of humanity.
In his work, logic, physics and epistemology faded into the background. Through the agency of Panaetius, Stoicism was increasingly seen as practical wisdom. He too travelled to Rome (ca. 144 BC),
where he introduced his version of Stoic theory.
≤

Panaetius was strongly opposed to astrology. Apparently this belief
was also followed by some Stoics.E Stoic principles included, as
noted above, the theory that everything has a cause, but the Early
Stoics also thought that everything in the cosmos had influence on
everything else. This gave some people a reason to think that the
future could be predicted from the positions of the stars. Panaetius
refuted this by saying that one star can occupy different positions
relative to the earth, and therefore cannot keep having the same
influence.
Posidonius
The Stoic school still had its home in Athens, but that changed in
the time of Posidonius of Apameia (Poseidonios, ca. 135 - 51 BC),
the successor of Panaetius. He began in Athens, but then started a
Stoic school on Rhodes, after which this island became the centre
of Stoicism for some time.
In contrast to Panaetius, Posidonius was very occupied with physics.
He was a great scholar, a universal thinker, a scientist similar to
Aristotle. And he was a great influence on Cicero.

In short, the ideas of the Early Stoa began to be watered down considerably …
Romans
Around the year 0 (though that year itself did not exist), a Stoic
movement came into being in the Roman Empire, which was later
called the ‘Roman Stoa’. In contrast to the Early (Greek) Stoa, this
is still fairly well known—and far more of its material has survived.
For the Roman Stoa, the emphasis came to lie entirely on ethics, for
which it was primarily about aiming for inner balance, in order to
put up with the whims of nature, and especially the whims of the
imperial regime. The most important exponents of this were Seneca,
Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius.
Cicero
Marcus Tullius Cicero (106-43 BC) was not himself a Stoic but
held Stoicism in high esteem. He studied the school of thought,
and criticised it, very seriously. Cicero played an important role in
making Greek philosophy widely known amongst the Romans.
He was a genuine eclectic, that is to say: he selected ideas from
different schools of thought. In that sense, nearly everyone is an
eclectic nowadays. What I like about him is that he was not simply
‘converted’ to a school of thought; he examined it very critically and
provided commentary on different ideas from Greek philosophy.
For example, he made an extensive comparison of Stoicism with the
teaching of Epicurus. I will say more about this after discussing the
ideas of Epicurus.
Seneca

Further, [the Stoics] say that that is not good of which both good and
bad use can be made; (…) therefore wealth and health are not goods. On
the other hand, Posidonius maintains that these things too are among
goods.R

Marcus Lucius Seneca (Seneca the Younger, 4 BC - 65 AD) was a tutor
to (Emperor) Nero. Everyone knows that the latter was no darling—
this is clear from the fact that he ordered Seneca to commit suicide.
Which Seneca ‘obediently’ did…Well, obediently, the alternative,
knowing Nero, would probably have been worse! Getting spoon-

54

55

≤

fed Stoic ideas, as happened to Nero, is unfortunately not a panacea
that makes someone a good person.
Seneca wrote a vast amount, which deserves a lengthier description
than mine, but to my mind his ideas are more or less a repetition of
stimulating ideas from Early Stoic ethics. His texts include many
practical examples, which no doubt made Stoic ideas attractive for
a wider audience.

very frugally. How is that so?
Entirely in accordance with Early Stoic views, Marcus Lucius Seneca
considered riches ‘of no importance’, because for wise people it does
not matter if they are rich or poor. Wealth, argued Seneca, is only
suitable for the wise, because only they can enjoy their possessions
without worrying and share them out without getting attached to
them. But it would be just as logical to claim that only the wise are
suitable for poverty, because only (Stoic) wise people are capable of
feeling happy despite being in miserable circumstances.

≤

≤

≤

When we are prepared for a disaster, it strikes us less hard (…) The wise
man knows that everything awaits him. Whatever happens, he can
always say ‘I knew it’.T
By making good use of your experiences, certainly if your starting
point is a deterministic universe, whatever happens you can say: ‘I
knew it’. To accidents, unexpected and undesirable events: ‘I knew
it’. Pure chance: ‘I knew it’. Someone dies: ‘I knew it’.

Seneca could, of course, as a rich man appeal to the preference theory of Stoicism. It is logical to have a preference for being healthy
rather than being ill. And therefore, according to Seneca and many
others, for wealth rather than poverty. In his dialogue On the Happy
Life, in which he defended himself against contemporary criticism
of his wealth, he admitted that he would rather practise the virtue
of ‘generosity’ which wealth makes possible, than the virtues of
poverty ‘whose test is blood and sweat’.Y

≤

≤

‘I knew it’. Good advice for people who encounter disappointment
time after time in their lives. The cause of this disappointment is
their own optimism. Optimism about the world and optimism
about other people. Instead of breaking into tears or anger, when
bad luck or other unfavourable occurrences happen, we would be
better off saying: ‘I knew it’. We keep thinking that we really can
determine what goes on in our surroundings. If things turn out differently, we act as if we are not ‘listened’ to, and we become angry
or disappointed.
‘Why does it rain just at the time when I want to go out?!’
Surely you knew that a rain shower was possible?

Perhaps it is not entirely coincidental that there is a Dutch book
called Seneca voor managers (Seneca for Managers)… In Seneca’s
writings I have more often come across things oriented towards selfinterest than in other Stoics’ writings. ‘Zeno for Managers’ seems a
lot less obvious to me. Although you could put your own spin on
anything, and managers certainly can!
≤

Seneca was exceedingly rich and he enjoyed his wealth to the full.
The original ideas about the unimportance of wealth were expressed by people (such as Zeno) who were not themselves rich and lived

In one of his letters to Lucilius, Seneca writes about the difference
between desiring and craving. If you stop craving but still desire to
do the same things, you can do these things without disquiet and
enjoy them more. It seems to me that Seneca is the most strongly
pleasure-oriented of all the Stoics which I describe here. But this is
pleasure without ‘slipping up’; he wanted nothing to do with passions. As for falling in love, he referred to Panaetius who seemed
to have said that wise people could fall in love, because they are

56

57

≤

sensible enough not to let themselves get carried away with it, but
ordinary people would be better to stay away from it. (The same
reasoning, then, that Seneca used with wealth.) In general it is the
case that: ‘We must, where possible, stay away from areas where we
can slip up.’
≤

It seems that even in Seneca’s time, Stoics were often told that they
were too demanding; that it was not about abolishing passions but
moderating them, because passions are part of human nature. But
Seneca said:
Do you know why we cannot do all this? Because we do not believe
that we can. Or rather, no, the situation is quite different: because we
love our moral weaknesses, we defend them and would rather excuse
them than get rid of them. Nature has given humans enough energy,
if we only make use of it. Nature has given humans enough energy, if
we gather our strengths and apply them entirely to defending ourselves,
and certainly not to attacking ourselves. What it amounts to is that we
do not want to; to say that we cannot is an excuse.U
≤

Concerning those who occupy themselves with pursuing material
and bodily desires, gluttony and ambition, pure profit and meeting
others’ expectations, and those who occupy themselves with bodily
beauty, he said:
They all stand in life without a fixed moral principle, with the consequence that they are slaves of their uncontrolled desires, wanting this
today and that tomorrow (…) there are a few men whom slavery holds
fast, but there are many more who hold fast to slavery.I
Epictetus
Epictetus (ca. 50-120 AD) was born in Hierapolis, in what is now
the south of Turkey, as the son of a female slave. He also served as
a slave, to a rich and influential Roman (the personal secretary of
58

Nero), where he became lucky to some extent: his master was broadminded enough that the young Epictetus obtained permission to
have lessons with the Stoic philosopher Gaius Musonius Rufus.
≤

This Gaius Musonius Rufus (ca. 30-100 AD), who is nowadays
little-known, was in his time probably as famous as Socrates. Rufus
encouraged his pupils to ‘rejoice in what is good and loathe what
is inferior’. ‘If you do that, you will become a philosopher of your
own accord. You will not need to wear shabby clothes, walk around
without a chiton, let your hair grow or do anything differently from
all normal people. Because while these things suit philosophers, the
practice of real philosophy is not in this, but in having the correct
thoughts and insights.’
Notably, Rufus gave much attention to the role of women: That
Women Too Should Study Philosophy is one of the titles of the surviving extracts of his work, and another is: Should Daughters Receive
the Same Education as Sons? Once he even dared to go to a battlefield
and preach about peace to the soldiers, for which he was of course
laughed at and threatened by macho types.O
Epictetus obtained a lot from Rufus’ lessons. For his inspiration,
he also looked back to the ethics of the Early Stoa, of Zeno and
Chrysippus.
≤

One day, Epictetus was set free, probably after the death of his master. He opened his own school of philosophy in Rome, but in the
year 89 AD there was an imperial decree that all philosophers must
leave Rome and Italy. Epictetus then moved to Nicopolis on the
coast of Northern Greece, and once again gave lessons there. He
was incredibly popular; people came from far and wide to attend
his lectures.
Epictetus was apparently lame, was a likeable teacher, and died
unmarried. Little more is known about his personal life.
≤

Like Socrates, he never wrote up his speeches. Luckily he had
59

a very diligent pupil who did write up his lectures. This pupil,
Arrian (Flavius Arrianus) collected them in his famous Handbook
(Enchiridion). The following quotations come from that handbook.
QP
≤

Men are disturbed, not by things, but by the principles and notions
which they form concerning things.
It is not the reality outside of us that confuses us or makes us sad
or angry, but the thoughts we have about the outside world. A
Sceptic would also endorse this. Otherwise, how is it that one person is afraid of spiders while another is not? Many people are afraid,
even of things that do not exist at all. You hear a burglar creeping
through your house, but only your own fear is reality.
≤

One must commit only to desire those things that one can indeed obtain,
and only to abhor those things that one can actually avoid.
What is impossible is impossible, so do not try against your better
judgment to do it. This is reminiscent of the commonsense Frisian
saying: ‘As ’t net kin sa ’t moat, dan moat it mar sa ’t kin.’ (If it cannot be done the way it should be done, then it must be done the way
it can be done).QQ An unanswerable remark full of wisdom; easy to
say, but difficult to apply in daily life (without grumbling!)
Sensible thoughts appear throughout the ages and come from all
corners of the world.

very useful. All the same, a few comments. Of course it is so that
we did not construct our own bodies—but nowadays they can be
worked on in many ways, from a life-saving appendix operation
to a ‘nose job’ based on vanity or shame. To a certain extent we can
also exercise influence on our reputation, on our possessions and
on our position. A great deal is not under our control, but someone
does not become rich automatically. If you are born very rich, then
you do have the choice of sharing out your wealth with the poor.
In short, for a lot of things it is not immediately obvious which of
Epictetus’ two categories they belong in. Life would be a lot easier
if it were always clear whether something can or cannot be changed
(by me).
Conversely, I cannot magically make myself wise: my realm of
thought is subject to relationships of cause and effect. Thus, the
hints and wise advice of Epictetus can only ‘catch on’ for me if they
fit into the collection of ideas in my head. A number of ideas can
make someone start enthusiastically to study Stoicism, for example
‘wanting to get the best out of myself’ or ‘wanting to do good things
(more than just what is pleasant for me)’, or even ‘no longer wanting
to be carried away by my feelings’ or ‘curious about wisdom’.
≤

As Epictetus himself said, it is about improving what can be
changed, accepting what cannot be changed, and especially about
developing the wisdom to make the distinction between the two
categories.
≤

The thought that some things can be changed and others cannot,
and thus that it is sensible to take account of this, is one that I find

A particularly difficult category is formed by things for which you
do not know whether or not they can change. You try something
(doing something with your computer, getting on well with someone, improving the world) and you fail, time after time. At what
point do you decide that you do not have what it takes? What is
true in any case is: until now you did not have ‘what it takes’; you
lacked the right knowledge, you or the other person lacked important communication skills, or there were other causes which prevent
‘success’. Continually trying the same thing is pointless. But you

60

61

≤

Some things are in our control and others not. Things in our control are
opinion, pursuit, desire, aversion, and, in a word, whatever are our own
actions. Things not in our control are body, property, reputation, command, and, in one word, whatever are not our own actions.

can keep thinking: maybe this time it will work, because now I
have, or know something-or-other. What never helps is sulking, or
kicking the equipment, or cursing at your friend.
With regard to whatever objects give you delight, are useful, or are
deeply loved, remember to tell yourself of what general nature they are,
beginning from the most insignificant things. If, for example, you are
fond of a specific ceramic cup, remind yourself that it is only ceramic
cups in general of which you are fond. Then, if it breaks, you will not
be disturbed. If you kiss your child, or your wife, say that you only kiss
things which are human, and thus you will not be disturbed if either of
them dies.
It is true that I was very disturbed when my friend broke a beautiful
old jar of my mother’s. We spent an afternoon sticking together the
many pieces, but the jar was no longer totally whole. But it was just
a jar. Years later when my mother died, this was an experience of a
different order; it made me much more heartbroken. Still I understand the words of Epictetus, and obtain comfort from them.
≤

Entirely in consistence with Seneca and the earlier Stoics, when he
lost friends and loved ones, Epictetus reasoned: Surely you knew
that they were mortal? This saying sounds cold or blunt to some, but
it can genuinely help someone quietly to recognise and accept the
death of loved ones. ‘It is true: I knew it’. That does not mean that
there are no feelings. What remains are the pleasant memories and
the understanding that everything is transitory. Most people keep
remembering their loved ones by association or in future plans; they
need time, and much exercise of thought, to deal with their loss.
A true Stoic continuously realises impermanence and accepts it, so
that he or she does not need to ‘get used to’ any new situation.
≤

for Athens and his friends and acquaintances, but made friends
with the pirates and tried to set them on the right track. ‘That is real
freedom’, said Epictetus. Indeed; it is practical action starting from
the situation you are in. Diogenes is a good example of a nonconformist, who in all times and places needed no one other than himself
in order to live how he wanted. If in prison, he would enter into discussions with other prisoners and guards. And as I would imagine
him based on all the stories, even on the torture rack he would still
be able to make his self-willed remarks, and even witty comments,
with which he would probably confuse his torturers. Whether or
not they are tall stories, Diogenes remains inspiring, because such a
self-willed approach is genuinely possible.
What is now expected of the citizen? That he does not seek his own
advantage, but continually sees himself as part of the whole. Then no
one will attempt, perpetrate or pursue that which is against the interest
of the Whole.
It is about taking account of the whole without ignoring the individual. If everyone thought this way, there would be no more conflicts of interest.QW
Someone does himself wrong by damaging me. Should I then also do
myself wrong by damaging him? Only damage to property and the body
is called damage, but if the will declines or becomes worse, is that not
also damage?
Taking revenge, as Epictetus seems to say here, is the most senseless
thing that you can do. Quite apart from the reaction that others
can have to it, from which you cannot immediately escape, taking
revenge is primarily bad for yourself. It seems to bring temporary
relief, but the thought behind it is unwise. Taking revenge is diametrically opposed to acting virtuously, and therefore to happiness.

Rather than complaining about bad luck and what life brings,
Epictetus said it is better to take an example from Diogenes of
Synope, the Cynic. Once, when he was captured, he did not long

For thus, if any hindrance arises in bathing, you will have it ready to say,
‘It was not only to bathe that I desired, but to keep my mind in a state
conformable to nature; and I will not keep it if I am bothered at things

62

63

that happen.’
These daily examples from antiquity are wonderful. When I think
of Roman baths I see beautiful ruins before me, but many of them
were newly built at that time, and what happened in them then
must have been similar to what happens now in swimming baths.
Even nowadays, when (say) other passengers in a train are rowdy,
it is possible to think: I do not just want to reach my destination, I
also want to remain sensible (i.e. wise, Stoic).
A man with no experience of philosophy will always hold others responsible for his setbacks; one starting to learn philosophy will hold himself
responsible, but one who has achieved true wisdom will hold neither
responsible.
(Here I read ‘human’ for ‘man’…) If someone is a nuisance, there are
many possible reasons for this. If you knew everything about that
person, you would see that being a nuisance is just a logical consequence of what went before. You can say to someone ‘you should
have done that differently’, but you cannot change the thoughts of
someone else. ‘I should have done that differently’ is a more useful
thought, but not if it only results in unproductive feelings of guilt.
Neither laying the blame on another nor yourself, but learning
from the past; that is the best way of dealing with setbacks. ‘I will
do that differently next time’, or ‘I will react differently to that’. In
the now there is a lot that can be learned for the future.
Do not long for everything to happen precisely as you wish, but wish
only that everything happens as it does, and you will succeed in life.
Does this mean that the world with all its deficiencies and social
injustices will remain as it is? No, because resistance and protest
against abuses are part of the chain of happenings. The world has
changed a lot since the time of Epictetus, and that is the result of
the deeds of all the people who have lived since then and those who
are still alive now. Slavery has been abolished—but a lot still needs
to be changed.
64

The key is to save your energy for things that are possible, instead of
stubbornly carrying coals to Newcastle or trying to bring the dead
back to life.
≤

Whoever, then, would be free, let him wish nothing, let him decline
nothing, which depends on others else he must necessarily be a slave.
≤

You must never assume that the man who attacks you verbally or physically can harm you. It is no more than an idea that such people can harm
you. And when someone annoys you, be aware that the cause of your
annoyance lies in your own appraisal of the situation.
If others act unreasonably, this is no reason to do the same yourself.
Anger at another always comes from feeling misunderstood or
offended. That is something you do to yourself. In such a situation,
you react less effectively than someone who remains level-headed.
Sometimes we call someone ‘irritating’, but on further examination
it appears that they do not irritate everyone, and do not irritate
equally those whom they do irritate. Soberly considered, the situation when I am annoyed by someone is: I cannot change that person
at that moment by being annoyed. By getting annoyed I torment
myself, and often the annoyer or third parties as well. I therefore
make the situation worse than it was. I would be better off thinking
how I could change the situation now or in the future, so that the
situation improves for everyone.
This involves doing the best within my capabilities and not worrying about things which are outside my capabilities—and especially
learning to distinguish between the two. The striking examples of
Epictetus (far more than I have mentioned here) can help with this.
Marcus Aurelius
Now for Marcus Aurelius, who lived from 121 to 180 AD. He grew
up in rich and influential circles. Marcus obtained a private education from the best tutors, and via his philosophy tutor came to know
65

Stoic teaching, especially that of Epictetus. Emperor Hadrian,
who himself had no children, had already noticed the serious and
diligent Marcus during his search for a suitable successor. First he
adopted an uncle of Marcus (who succeeded Hadrian immediately after his death) and Marcus was in turn adopted by this uncle,
whose imperial name was Antoninus Pius. From the age of forty
Marcus became Roman Emperor—but probably would rather have
been a full-time philosopher. In any case it seems clear to me that
Marcus Aurelius was not emperor for pleasure, but saw governing
as a very great responsibility. He saw the Roman Empire as a good
enterprise, which he happened to be predestined to lead for a time.
He found this difficult, and so he addressed himself in encouraging,
comforting and cautionary terms in his diary.
Although he was a very ‘mild’ emperor compared to others, even
in his time Christians and other groups were persecuted, wars were
fought, and so forth. He wrote down many of his thoughts, even
when he travelled with his army through war zones. From what
he wrote he seemed very conscientious—but his conscience apparently did not protest against war and dominion. How come? What
should be made of the following pieces?
A spider is proud when it has caught a fly, and another when he has
caught a poor hare, and another when he has taken a little fish in a
net, and another when he has taken wild boars, and another when he
has taken bears, and another when he has taken Sarmatians [nomads
from what is now Iran]. Are not these robbers, if thou examinest their
opinions?QE
≤

Love the art [of life], poor as it may be, which thou hast learned, and
be content with it; and pass through the rest of life like one who has
intrusted to the gods with his whole soul all that he has, making thyself
neither the tyrant nor the slave of any man.
And an emperor said that! Here I read ‘the gods’ as a metaphor
for ‘the course of events’. Being emperor was part of the ‘course of
events’ and was not something to be proud of.
66

≤

Like other representatives of the Roman Stoa, Marcus was practically oriented and his goal was not ‘to be wise’ but ‘to be good’.
Perhaps he considered ‘wanting to be wise’ as an ambitious tendency, which of course would not be truly wise.
Noteworthy is the searching, sometimes uncertain tone which
Marcus demonstrates in many of his passages. His ‘life lessons’ sound
very different to those of his predecessors Seneca and Epictetus—the
latter’s writings are clearly directed at others, while Marcus’ notes
form a philosophical diary of sensible hints written for himself.
Epictetus was clearly Marcus’ greatest source of inspiration. The
emperor had nothing but great appreciation for this former slave.
≤

Marcus thought a lot about death.
(…) and, finally, waiting for death with a cheerful mind, as being
nothing else than a dissolution of the elements of which every living
being is compounded. But if there is no harm to the elements themselves in each continually changing into another, why should a man have
any apprehension about the change and dissolution of all the elements?
For it is according to nature, and nothing is evil which is according to
nature.
≤

Everything that is natural is therefore beautiful, he told himself.
Even the folds of skin above the eyes of a lion and the foam that
drips out of the mouth of a wild boar are beautiful and fascinating.
Even old people can be considered beautiful. And the wide open
mouth of a real lion is not less beautiful than that of a sculpture of
a lion.
Everything that happens takes place out of necessity, in the long
chain (or complex network) of causes and effects. All this is necessary
and therefore natural. So it is all ‘good’, according to Marcus, and
according to the Stoa.

67

≤

According to Marcus, it is never necessary to get annoyed at others’
mistakes. Just think of what mistakes you make yourself. You consider for example that money, or enjoyment, or fame is something
good. As well as this, the mistake-maker can apparently not do
otherwise than act in that way. What you can do is bring round him
or her to other ideas.QR
≤

Alexander the Macedonian [i.e. Alexander the Great] and his groom
by death were brought to the same state; for either they were received
among the same seminal principles of the universe, or they were alike
dispersed among the atoms.

It would be fine if bad behaviour led directly to unhappiness, but if
this were so, the world would probably have long since looked very
different. It is the case that it is better to choose happiness with a
‘pure conscience’ over enjoyment or short-term pleasure. But the
latter is often easier to obtain, and so is often ‘reached’. Marcus
probably found that a bit exasperating. But if happiness was easy
to achieve as a side-effect of goodness, there would have been ideal
people, from whom an ideal society could easily have been formed.
Clearly, that is not the case.

Is it a consoling thought that everyone will eventually disintegrate
into separate atoms? Perhaps it is. Everyone forms part of the same
whole. However different people seem from one another, in questions of life and death we are all equal. Someone who realises that is
more inclined to adopt a social, committed attitude.
Marcus clearly had a low opinion of military leaders, who probably
had more ‘fun’ in their profession than he did:
Alexander and Caius [Julius Caesar] and Pompeius, what are they in
comparison with Diogenes and Heraclitus and Socrates? For they were
acquainted with things, and their causes [forms], and their matter, and
the ruling principles of these men were the same [or conformable to their
pursuits]. But as to the others, how many things had they to care for,
and to how many things were they slaves!
≤

Enjoyment is not good, according to Marcus, because ‘baddies’
have a lot of it. He gave as examples bandits, bastards, father-killers
and tyrants. But would it really be so great, so full of pleasure, to live
the life of a bandit? You would always need to watch out that you
did not get stabbed or taken captive. Safety and genuine love are, I
think, general human desires, which are scarcely or never satisfied
in such company.
68

69

Don’t be a slave to your feelings

VIII
ATTRACTIVE IDEAS FROM THE
EARLY STOA

In previous chapters, the emphasis lay on the ideas as brought forward by Stoics; in this chapter, as well as in the following chapter on
questions and misunderstandings, my own annotations to a number of these ideas are highlighted. This chapter describes a number
of ‘strong points’ of Stoicism.
Autonomy
The pursuit of self-control, autonomy, autarkeia, is one of the things
which appeals to me in Stoic teaching, particularly as expounded
by Zeno. Independent thought, going my own way and not being
distracted by things which are not relevant. Not letting myself be
carried along by strong feelings. Not letting myself be fooled into
getting a kick out of money, looks or outward appearances, nor subjugated by the fear of others’ (negative) opinions. Freeing daily life
of all forms of narrow-minded desires and faults. Focusing attention on what is really important: good life.
Another pleasant aspect of this idea is that happiness is possible
for everyone in this way; good and bad luck are never distributed
‘fairly’, but everyone who has enough brains to worry occasionally
also has enough brains to develop a Stoic view on life. In this, all
people who are capable of thinking are equal.
70

The Stoics were not the only Ancient Greeks who were concerned
about passions. Aristotle understood emotions to mean ‘all perceptions associated with pleasure and pain’. He also found it to be characteristic that we do not choose consciously to be afraid or angry;
it just happens. His starting point was that a happy medium can
always be found between two incorrect positions. For example, he
saw generosity as the proper way to deal with money, lying between
the two extremes of extravagance and greed.
He found that you should keep choosing the middle way by moderating your strong ‘incorrect’ reactions.Q The Stoics, however, found
that moderating did not go far enough; ‘cure, not moderate’ was
their advice—a greater challenge.
≤

Greeks in general considered themselves superior to non-Greeks;
they called the latter ‘barbarians’, who spoke no Greek but just babbled something or other. Stoics, with their cosmopolitan attitude,
consider this distinction nonsense: it is not people who are from
foreign lands or speak other languages who are barbarians; countries of origin or language are irrelevant. The only distinction that
is relevant is that between the wise and the non-wise: all non-wise
people are barbarians! Barbarians, or slaves, because they let themselves be directed by the outside world. The difference between real
slaves and slaves in the sense that the Stoics use the term here, is that
the latter can free themselves of their chains with their own strength
of mind. Instead of punishment and persecution, which real slaves
are threatened with, there is here just the ‘threat’ of a happier, more
independent and more useful life.
≤

Strong feelings are unreasonable. Some allow themselves to be
carried along by anger, panic, adoration, jealousy or falling head
over heels in love. Allowing yourself to be carried along by a strong
feeling amounts to thinking that you need someone other than
yourself for happiness. This boils down to a dependent attitude—
71

superficial even. Through passion, people can carry out thoughtless
and damaging acts.
But there is nothing wrong with desires and aspirations. The key is
to ensure that I do not become dependent on my cravings. Strong
feelings cause a type of narrowing of consciousness that is damaging
both on an intellectual and a moral level.
All feelings rest on judgments, on conclusions from earlier thinking—at any moment I can decide to think about and do something
valuable; even the decision to do so is valuable, and causes eupatheiai: good, pleasant feelings.
≤

Avoiding becoming addicted is not such an easy task: according to a
Stoic perspective, almost everyone is more or less addicted to something. Think not just of drugs or alcohol, but coffee, chocolate,
sweets, spending money, eating, falling in love, having sex, watching TV, getting a kick out of danger, trashy novels, listening to
music, reading newspapers, gossiping … All these are passive forms
of enjoyment. Passive enjoyment is quite simply easier than living
an active life. But with passive enjoyment, you keep missing something, so that people need stronger and stronger stimuli to achieve
it. By focusing on activity, I have a lot more control over my own
life. It provides a different quality of happiness.

me. Whatever my circumstances or the state of the world, I can
always make something of my life by obtaining happiness from
active involvement in (good) things. It is, I suspect, for most people
very difficult to apply this principle all the time. Before you know it,
you can fall back into the passive form of happiness, or more often,
the associated passive form of unhappiness.
≤

If you manage to drive out strong and nagging feelings—by refuting the ideas behind these feelings—you are not insensitive; quite
the contrary. Lack of passion (apatheia) is not a goal in itself; if you
do good things, good feelings (eupatheiai) arise by themselves: joy
(instead of frenzy), carefulness (instead of fear) and desire (a rational
form of aspiration instead of hankering or craving). Active attitudes,
in other words, instead of passive. Instead of ‘no passions’ you could
instead say ‘no passivity’.
≤

It sounds optimistic, but I think that an active attitude is a question
of practice, i.e. an attitude that everyone can learn.
Long-term thinking

According to the Stoics, a good life is not possible as long as I consider health, wealth and similar ‘indifferent’ matters to be indispensable. As long as I consider these things necessary, I will yearn
for what I do not have, and fear losing what I do have. Considering
appearance to be important, judging yourself and others according
to beauty standards (either conventional ones or your own), is similar to this. All of this is unimportant and a waste of energy to get
worked up about. What is important is to take an active attitude,
to make what I personally think and do into a source of happiness.
This is at the same time a form of happiness that cannot be hindered
by anything outside of me, and which no one can take away from

Because for Stoics, what is good coincides with what is wise, they
should always be focused on sustainability, i.e. in the long term,
while at the same time taking account of the consequences of particular behaviour for other people. Imagine I am allergic to eating
olives, to the extent that I come out in infectious ulcers immediately
after eating them. I know for certain that after such an experience,
I would immediately stop eating olives, no matter how tasty they
were! But what would I do if I heard that by eating delicious olives
I risk the chance of serious and infectious ulcers at an advanced
age? When the disadvantageous effects of something only manifest
themselves in the long term, the need to change behaviour is less
obvious for many people. Bad health because of eating too much
unhealthy food is common. In this case, what someone wants in the
short term does not correspond with what is good in the long term:

72

73

Down with passivity; happiness is activity

contradictory thoughts are involved. Mostly, people know perfectly
well which of the thoughts are ‘sensible’ and which are ‘unwise’.
Addicts (and as noted, from the Stoic perspective almost everyone
is addicted to something) are fixated on satisfaction of short-term
gratifications and completely fail to make rational assessments.
‘Would you like a piece of chocolate?’ ‘Oh, yes, great!’ What has
that saliva in my mouth to do with becoming fat or getting toothache in the long term? I won’t become fat from that one little piece,
so thanks, I’ll have one!
Less obvious still for many people is, for example, thinking about
how food was produced. Have people or animals been exploited
for this cream cake? Have these tomatoes been sprayed with poisonous pesticides, or transported by plane? For those who want to
take account of the effects on other people and animals in the long
term, these are important considerations. The example of driving
cars is also very suitable for showing how difficult it seems to be
for most people to change from short-term self-interest to a more
broadly-based long-term interest (including self-interest). People
keep driving because it is so easy, even if they know that this, together with other people’s driving, leads to increasing pollution and
global warming. Explaining away can play a role in all of this. ‘It
will take time’. ‘What is the overall impact of whether or not I drive
today?’ ‘I can stop, but the neighbours keep driving; I can be good
but I’m not crazy’.
Behind these arguments, however, there always lurks the idea that
the needs for short-term enjoyment and convenience are more
important than other considerations. The compelling voice of
short-term-ism stands on a pedestal and says: ‘I just want that,
because that’s how I feel, so it must happen—and right now’.
Liberating yourself from this internal tyrant leads automatically to
a long-term orientation.

judgments disappear, the strong, nagging feelings also go away
immediately.
≤

‘Avarice is the supposition that money is something good’, stated
Chrysippus. Avarice is therefore not an innate character trait, but
an attitude that someone takes on the basis of a particular judgment. If you look at it in this way, people can work on their actions,
including their sometimes strange traits and social difficulties. Who
knows, perhaps they will change their opinion, and therefore their
attitude if someone else says a few sensible things to them?

Long live reason!
Feelings are based on judgments. Craving, anger, delirious joy, fear
and grief: all these affectations are, according to Stoics, the result
of faulty (inadequate) formation of opinions. If these inadequate
74

75

IX
QUESTIONS, PRECONCEPTIONS
AND MISUNDERSTANDINGS

free in the sense of lacking causality, we experience the result of
evaluations in our head as decisions made in total freedom. Thus, ‘I’
can on a good day ‘decide’ to deepen my understanding of Stoicism.
This decision is the necessary consequence of the state of affairs in
my brain. But because it is my own brain—no one is forcing me—I
experience the sense of complete freedom.
≤

Whether I will behave appropriately or wisely depends just as
much on the state of affairs as whether or not a volcano erupts. The
behaviour of a volcano appears up to now to be unfathomable and
unpredictable, let alone my behaviour. Unpredictability is, however, quite different from arbitrariness.
≤

‘A consistent Stoic does nothing’
It is not difficult to make Stoic ethics look ridiculous. For example,
by saying: ‘A true Stoic ought to do nothing, make no decisions
at all’. At least two ‘reasons’ can be given for this. The first is:
‘Whatever I do, it makes no difference, because I can be completely
happy in any situation’.
The second is: ‘Everything is predetermined, so I do not have to
decide or do anything myself’. How can we refute this (possibly
faulty) reasoning?
I will deal with the second point below (under ‘Determinism and
free will’). Regarding the first point: it is a misunderstanding that
nothing makes any difference for a Stoic; one thing certainly makes
a difference, and that is precisely my active contribution, my pursuit
of wisdom, of ‘what is good’, a life of value, in which I get the best
out of myself.

Saying ‘everything is predetermined, so I do not have to decide or do
anything myself’ is not a logical conclusion from determinism. It
could just have well been said that I did decide something (namely
that I have nothing to decide on) and do something, namely rest on
my laurels.
For a thinking being, making no decisions is not possible. The
future is not fixed, the future is yet to be determined, by me amongst
others—I am a part of the universe, a consequence of what went
before me. The future of the universe will in turn follow from what
went before, but no one, no computer, not even an imaginary one,
is capable of predicting this future. The universe is itself the ‘computer’ and I am a component of it.
≤

Stoicism is based on the human freedom to choose to behave appropriately or inappropriately, wise or unwise, but it is also based on a
deterministic material universe. Although the will is of course not

If everything is connected by cause and effect, I can decide nothing
outside these causes and effects. A whole lot of things are therefore
impossible—I can imagine many more things than are possible, and
there are a lot of things which I do not imagine, both possible and
impossible, because they do not ensue from the collection of ideas
in my brain. Everything that ‘I’ decide shows up somewhere, and
‘I’ am not static, but a constantly changing and developing component of the great universe with all its complex causes and effects.

76

77

Determinism and free will

Because I cannot get to the bottom of all the causes and effects
in and around ‘me’, it is hard for me to predict my future behaviour. Unpredictability is often confused with lack of causality. The
problem that many people have with the combination of free will
and determinism boils down to a misrepresentation: they place
themselves, as it were, outside the universe, as if they were freelyfloating souls that are not dependent on causes but nevertheless
have effects—like little gods.
Is everything fixed in advance, then? That, too, is something you
can only say if you pretend you are outside of the universe and outside of time. The universe is always busy establishing what happens
next. We are part of this, as tiny parts of the universe.Q
≤

A vast number of things are impossible, and learning to face that is
one of the important lessons of Stoicism—so that you pay full attention to what is possible.
Just as someone who lives unhealthily can, without grumbling, try
to become healthy again by behaviour changes (eating, drinking,
exercise, fresh air), someone wanting to change the world can raise
the issue of unjust distribution of food and opportunities in the
world and try to change the situation, because healthy living and
fair distribution of resources are within the scope of human possibilities. Grumbling about a hurricane is pointless; you can, however,
try to prevent damage, and help people who have suffered damage
from it. And so on.
Of course, whether or not grumbling occurs, it too is part of the
necessary course of events in the universe, as is expressing the idea
‘you become unhappy by grumbling’. Someone who takes up that
idea (because that idea evidently fits with other ideas in their head)
and gives up grumbling can become glad from doing so.

someone away. Yet by behaving angrily, you cannot drive the past
away. A hurricane will also not take the slightest notice of you. By
displaying distress (even if you do not feel it) you can perhaps generate sympathy. People might help you. But they cannot turn the
clock back for you. What has happened has happened. Realising
this (i.e. by ‘realising’ determinism) can lead to the insight that
moaning, being jealous and all other troublesome feelings or moods
are based on unreasonable ideas. This realisation can lead you to
stop giving your assent to such ideas.
Is a Stoic indifferent?
No. Passions, strong emotions and feelings were considered aberrations or illnesses, not just by the Stoics but also by other Ancient
Greek thinkers. The solution put forward by the Peripatetics
(Aristotle and his pupils and successors)—moderating the passions—
was considered incorrect by the Stoics, as noted earlier. Surely you
do not moderate an illness! A bit of anger is still anger, and distracts
from happiness and proper understanding of things. Affectations or
passions must therefore not be tempered, but rigorously driven out
by expanding understanding through thinking, after which strong
feelings no longer arise. What happens to me is, according to the
Stoics, ‘of no importance’; what is important is the attitude I take.
A Stoic labours entirely for the ‘beautiful’ or the ‘good’, letting the
negative events of life wash over and reacting in a resigned or indifferent way to them.
‘A Stoic is hard or insensitive’

A deterministic view of the world makes the step towards a Stoic
attitude easier. If you look at most people’s many un-Stoic reactions, it is as if we think that the course of events can be turned back
if we make enough fuss. By behaving angrily, you can perhaps drive

But even labouring for the good can lead to misunderstandings.
In the book A New StoicismW I stumbled upon the following line
of reasoning: if a Stoic saves a child from a burning house, it is
not out of empathy with the child but ‘to do good’. Compassion,
according to the author, is not a Stoic attitude; if you do not need to
have compassion for yourself, you also do not need to commiserate
with another. Indeed, Zeno seems to have rejected compassion. If
the child does perish in the flames, the example continues, the wise

78

79

≤

woman or man does not mourn, because: 1. she or he has done what
is good, 2. death is not evil, 3. everything that happens is the best,
even if we do not understand it.
The misunderstanding here is not that it is incorrect; to me this does
indeed appear to be Stoic reasoning. The misunderstanding is that
this is seen by many people as hard and indifferent. What seems
hard is merely sensible; in practice, the Stoic acts the same as someone who acts out of empathy. The Stoic remains calm where someone else might panic. Incidentally, from many stories of people who
performed ‘heroic deeds’ (such as rescuing a child from a burning
house) it is known that they were not overcome with emotions at
that moment, but thought clearly and acted purposefully. Strong,
nagging feelings are a particular nuisance when quick action is
needed, and it seems there are people for whom these ‘affectations’
spontaneously disappear (without the use of Stoic theory), so that
they can act purposefully. If I see an accident happen, it is better
that I keep a cool head. Then I am in a better position to call a doctor, and also to sit quietly with the injured person and calm, help
and comfort people. All that is certainly not insensitive. But it can
be free from unpleasant feelings. If someone suffers, I do not need to
share their suffering. The attitudes which are the most ‘appropriate’
at such a moment are consideration, alertness and helpfulness.

poverty, pain, etc. of others. However, I have never encountered
examples of this. And from what I have encountered, it seems that
the Stoics intentionally did things in pursuit of justice and other
positive values. Hitting someone and then, when they complain or
react indignantly, shouting ‘Be stoic!’ is therefore not a Stoic action.
It is about doing your best, including in social life—the opposite of
damaging others or not helping them.
I can empathise with other people, but I cannot change their thoughts that lead to sorrow. They can only do that themselves. And
the suffering that I feel in sympathy with them lies only in my
own head; it says nothing about the suffering (or lack of suffering)
of others. (More than once I have ‘sympathised’ with others who
themselves, it later turned out, were not suffering at all ...) Thoughts
that lead to sharing suffering are (just like thoughts that lead to
other compelling feelings) not desirable and not necessary. The key
point, once again, is an active attitude; sharing suffering and feelings of guilt only cause me to feel rotten. It is much more useful to
think how I can help someone, and in general how I can contribute
to a world where everyone is free, has enough to eat and drink, can
have a decent place to live, and so on.

≤

≤

I have never come across an example about saving children in the
ancient texts. It seems, though, that there are two pictures of ‘the
Stoic’: on the one hand, the picture of the hard, strict, Stoic ‘icicle’
who feels committed to nothing and no one, and on the other hand,
the super-social cosmopolitan, politically committed, labouring
entirely for the welfare of others.

A Stoic is not indifferent to the fate of others, but does not need
to share others’ suffering in order to help them. Stoic values such
as justice and worldwide friendship (or solidarity) ensure a social
attitude.

≤

≤

From a crude interpretation of the Stoic notions of indifferent matters, it could be concluded that a Stoic is indifferent to the suffering
that someone else is subjected to. If it is the case that you do not
need to worry about your own poverty or suffering, then according
to this reasoning, you also do not need to be concerned about the

Dedicating yourself to what is good and sustainable: thinking (also)
of others, taking account of people from far away, of the environment, of the long term and so on always causes a certain amount
more trouble (sometimes a lot more) than thinking mainly about
yourself and the short term. Focusing on fun, a life of ease and
physical pleasure is all much easier than focusing on knowledge,
wisdom and deep and long-lasting happiness. This is precisely

80

81

≤

where people’s ‘badness’ comes from. This illustrates the dangerous
side of laziness; you could even say that laziness is hard and insensitive.
Irrationality
In Early Stoicism, there seems to be a contradiction: how can it be
that a perfectly rational universe contains humans who think and
act irrationally? It could be that passions do not belong to the universe, but that would mean that there is something else apart from
the universe, or that there is disunity in the universe, and then the
universe would not be perfect. Stoics from the Middle Stoa (notably
Panaetius and Posidonius) tried to solve this problem, but this came
at the cost of the monism of the Early Stoics: they saw the irrational
as a kind of uprising against logos. The irrational is a little devil—it
starts to look very much like the (already old) question of how evil
can exist in the world alongside a god who is both good and allpowerful.
≤

Logos, nature or the cosmos was seen by the Stoics as a kind of living
beingE—not only living, but also rational, perfectly rational even.
The evil that we think we see (the things that do not seem just,
logical or rational) was described in broad terms by the Early Stoics
as a consequence of our limited outlook. If I sprain my foot, this is
a painful nuisance, but is undoubtedly (according to Zeno and his
associates) good for something in the greater whole: for that big
beast, logos. Thus the outside world is totally ‘rational’. But what is
the situation with our often very ‘irrational’ world of thoughts? Is
my un-Stoic moaning good for anything? For example, in order to
learn from it what not to do? From the perspective of the Early Stoa
that must be so, because my thoughts, however ‘irrational’, are also
part of the universe, of logos.
≤

for example in the thoughts of a human being, unreasonableness
may well be present, because humans are small parts of the whole,
of which they (generally) have no complete overview. People’s
thoughts can ‘wobble’, go off the road, just like the runner mentioned earlier, who is unable to stop quickly without stumbling.
≤

Rationality is, for the Early Stoics, both a description and an endeavour. That is problematic, because if the description is correct and
everything is rational, then no more endeavour is needed; then, even
strong bursts of anger are rational.
If someone curses me, and I react sensibly in a Stoic manner, there
are causes for this, just as there would be causes if I became angry,
because for all events—a volcanic eruption, an eruption of anger,
but equally for a wise reaction—there are corresponding causes. Is it
the case, then, that all events are ‘rational’?
No, I would say, because something can only be rational if preceded by thought activity, and a volcanic eruption is not preceded by
thought activity. The Stoics, though, would say yes; the universe is
a rational being, and even a volcanic eruption forms part of this rational universe. But, I would counter, even a foolish, i.e. irrationally
thinking and acting, individual is part of this universe.
≤

It seems to me that for Stoics, there are two levels of irrationality.
The Great Whole that by definition operates rationally, and within
it humans gifted with reason, who have no full overview of the
whole, and sometimes or often let themselves be carried along by
their irrational passions.
The confusion arises partly through the use of words: ‘irrational’
human behaviour, in the sense of inadequate/foolish, is at the same
time ‘rational’ in the sense of ‘a consequence of thinking, judging’.
The wider and narrower meanings of the words ‘rational/reasonable’ and ‘irrational/unreasonable’ can easily get confused.

Logos, the complete Reason which permeates everything, can of
course not be unreasonable. But on a smaller scale, on another level,

The problem of irrationality only crops up if it is supposed that the

82

83

≤

cosmos is a living being with an all-knowing and perfectly rational
brain. I do not believe in that being; in that respect, I feel closer to
the Atomists and the Sceptics.R I just see fallible people, who now
and again think and act effectively to some extent. I see rational
thinking or rationality as a possibility of matter,T and as an enormously complex and fragile state that can easily get stuck or fall
apart entirely.
For those who do not believe in logos, the question, ‘How can the
irrational arise in a rational world?’ can be simply ‘solved’ by making
a distinction between causality and reasonableness. Causality is a
concept that applies as much to the ‘behaviour’ of stones and clouds
as to the feelings and thoughts of people—whether these thoughts
are reasonable or unreasonable. The concept of reasonableness
applies only to people (and sometimes also to other animals) who
are capable of considering things, and therefore capable of reasonable behaviour.
‘Stoics are quacks’Y
Why are Stoics so intolerant? For the same reason as sanctimonious
hypocrites. They are bad-tempered because they oppose nature, deny
themselves everything and suffer as a result. They are secretly jealous of
people with less strict morals.U
This was said, notably, by one of my favourite thinkers of the
Enlightenment!
It is of course totally unimportant whether or not Zeno was nice.
Whether or not you could laugh with him. Whether or not he
shared out his wisdom generously. If you believe a number of the
stories about Zeno (often gossip from his opponents) he was uncompromising and had rigid opinions. What does that mean? Perhaps it
is just that his opinions could not be made fun of, and he stood up
for them. I do think that he definitely did not want anything to do
with the ideas of Epicurus, nor of the Sceptics.
That Zeno strictly judged the behaviour of other people suggests
that he thought that he could change people. It can also be deduced
that Zeno considered that there is something wrong with anger, but
84

not with critical judgment of the behaviour of others.
From other anecdotes, Zeno comes across as someone who could
enjoy life (‘he loved green figs and sunbathing’), who did not always
avoid parties, who considered friendship very important, and who
(sometimes or often?) was in love (‘Chremonides was a favourite of
him’).I
≤

Yet it may well be true that quite a lot of people who call or called
themselves ‘Stoics’ are or were boring whiners. People who denied
themselves all sorts of things, but continued to long for them, so
that they reacted jealously to others who enjoyed those things. Of
course, these people are, and were, not real Stoics!
‘It can be useful to get angry’
Oh yes? First, let us clear away a misunderstanding. If remaining
calm is always the best thing, that does not mean that you must be
lethargic and that you, for example, should not pull your hand back
quickly as soon as you burn it. In such situations, physically acting
quickly is of vital importance. These quick reactions happen by
themselves; these are innate reflexes, functional and without panic.
In these situations as well, ‘not getting angry’ has nothing to do
with lethargy, nor with ‘letting them make a fool of me’. There are
two Stoic arguments against anger and other compelling emotions.
The first is of a logical nature: from the insight that all events follow necessarily from what happened before them, strong bursts of
feelings are unreasonable: an unnecessary and absurd protest against
the past. The second argument lies in the area of ethics and is practical in nature, aimed at the effects of anger: strong bursts of feelings,
such as anger, cloud one’s thoughts, so that unwise decisions are
likely to be taken. Anger can cause a lot of damage, as everyone
knows.
≤

That by far the most sensible thing to do in most situations is remain
calm is something that Ancient Greeks already knew, just like eve85

ryone else with enough life experience. The Stoics, however, went a
step further: the wise allow their peace of mind to be disturbed by
nothing or no one, because nothing that comes from outside can be
good or evil. Becoming angry is therefore never a suitable reaction.
Indeed, nothing ‘evil’ can come at me from outside. A rain shower
can turn out bad for me, because I do not like getting wet, so that
I would be (un-Stoically) annoyed if I had to cycle through it. But
a rain shower is not ‘evil’, and even after a long drought it is not
‘good’, however happy the farmers would be about it. A farmer may
be happy with a rain shower, as are the worms, while a grasshopper
would have preferred sunny weather. Because of humans’ innate
egocentricity, it is easy for them to think that things as they stand
are arranged for them. Some pious people pray during their holiday
for good weather, while the equally devout farmers neighbouring
their holiday homes pray for rain. The same kind of naive attitude
creates the idea that good and evil come at us from outside.
Because the outside world as it manifests itself to me at a particular
moment is neither good nor evil, it is not just unwise but senseless
to react to it with strong feelings. In a dangerous situation, it is both
sensible and logical to keep a cool head. The insight that neither
lava approaching me nor a lion can be ‘evil’ does actually help,
since because of this I am more likely to deal with it rationally, i.e.
quietly, sensibly and soberly. Once I no longer see them as ‘evil’, I
no longer have the tendency to get angry myself.
≤

But what about human deeds? Surely they can be good or evil,
and the deeds of others surely come at me from outside? Of course
people have their own motivations, which are sometimes oriented
around their own greed, getting their own way, revenge or other
objectionable things. In other cases, people’s motivations are for
a better life for everyone, or similar attractive things. Even more
commonly, they can be a combination of the two intentions. I can
divide them into ‘good’ and ‘evil’ motivations, but that is ‘only’
my judgment. People’s motives are the consequence of a long series
of causes. In that respect, the origin of a power-mad person is not
entirely different from the origin of a hurricane. For me they are
86

both phenomena in the outside world that I do not have control
of. Getting angry at another person (or myself) is just as senseless as
getting angry at a volcano.
≤

All the same, there is an important difference: a human being can
arrive at different thoughts through reason, for a hurricane that is
somewhat harder. Someone can take other thoughts from the outside world and make them his or her own. People can try to be each
other’s inspiring pieces of the outside world.
≤

From the insight that everything has a cause, I can see that my
anger towards another person is just as unsuitable as anger at a rain
shower. This does not make me a passive pawn within the whole,
quite the contrary. Precisely because everything has a cause, I can
think about how I myself can be the cause for things to change in
the outside world.
‘A Stoic knows no fear’
In the book Kerngedachten van de Stoa (Key thoughts of the Stoa) by
M. van StraatenO the author seems to assume that ‘the real Stoic’ can
feel pain, enjoyment, fear or desire, but he does not let himself be led
by them; he relies only on his power of reason.
Is that so? If someone is ‘Stoically wise’, does that mean that this
person as a whole has no unpleasant feelings, or does a Stoic have
these feelings but does not ‘moan’ about them?
≤

Physical feelings (hunger, pain, enjoyment) are innate and can at
the most be suppressed, put into perspective or ignored. There is
nothing wrong with these physical feelings, and Stoicism says little or nothing about them. They are very useful for survival. People
who cannot experience pain are a danger to themselves, as are
people who cannot be scared. These basic feelings, which serve as
signals, belong in our toolbox of life. Even that of a dyed-in-the87

wool Stoic.
It is different in the case of the feelings which get in the way of
sensible decisions and therefore get in the way of a valuable or
good life for myself and people around me. Hate, revenge, feeling
unappreciated, pride, jealousy, being offended, anger, resentment,
worry, melancholy, panic, etc. These are feelings which are about
thoughtless judgments. Thoughtless judgments about the world
outside myself or about my inner world. Judgments which I can
consider debatable for myself, and can therefore change.
≤

If the question is whether ‘the wise’ (i.e. someone who understands
Stoicism well and has also succeeded in applying it) will experience
no suffering, then the answer seems to me: indeed, no suffering.
Bodily pain remains possible, but the wise do not suffer from the
pain, and regarding being scared at danger and other basic physical
reactions, ‘the wise’ will not give this more attention than is strictly
necessary. In other words, not moaning about pain, and being scared for no longer than is needed to take action.
A moderately rational Stoic is not showing a ‘stiff upper lip’, just
being sensible. In terms of the Stoa: only the wise are really free,
being independent of the circumstances for their states of mind; the
rest are slaves!
‘Your own fault’

Detachment
From the ideas of the Early Stoics, you could infer that Stoicism was
primarily about detachment: do not attach yourself to anything,
then nothing can be ‘taken away’ from you.QQ This statement is difficult to deny, but I still find it a somewhat negative point of view.
Detachment places emphasis on things that are not there.
I would rather put it this way: all that I have is my inner world,
which is at the same time a small part of the cosmos which I can
work on considerably. Then, the only really important thing is that
I do good things. The emphasis then comes to lie on what really is
there: an active attitude where you try to make a positive contribution to the world.
‘Stoicism is focused on conformation, so is apolitical or
right-wing’
The Stoics, as I like to emphasise, also had social ideals, of which
cosmopolitanism is the clearest example. All the same, the movement is not unambiguous, politically speaking. Zeno had unmistakable anarchist traits, while Marcus Aurelius was a Roman emperor
and therefore definitely not an anarchist; Seneca is quoted with
approval by those at the top of the modern business world. Looked
at in this way, the Stoic doctrine can be used by people from all
kinds of political and economic backgrounds. Panaetius liked talking of ‘duty’ while Zeno spoke only of ‘appropriate behaviour’.
The Early Stoics also spoke of ‘going with the flow, not grumbling’.
That does not sound very revolutionary. But was that meant as a
political statement?

In the Stoic theory of happiness, it may seem to some people that
there is an idea that it is your own fault if you are not well, just as
the current ‘all-in-the mind brigade’QP claims. After all, a ‘listless
mood’ comes about because you have failed to leave bad things
alone. But here we are only talking about cause and effect, not guilt,
since the concept of guilt is inconsistent with determinism. ‘Doing
my best’, certainly: that is something that is focused on now and on
the future. But I can only do my best in those things that I can genuinely exercise influence over. The past is not one of them. Someone
is therefore not guilty of her or his bad luck—(s)he can in fact learn
to be unhappy no longer.

It seems at first sight as if ‘going with the flow’ means that you
must accept everything as it is. But that is not stated. It is also not
stated that you must not protest against hierarchical relationships
and other oppression; actually, it is not a political message but a
philosophical one. Philosophical ideas are more fundamental, more
generally valid than political ones. Going with the flow, then, does

88

89

≤

not mean adapting myself to the society that I happen to have
grown up in, but that I face the world (including society) as it is and
that I try as sensibly as possible to draw possible conclusions from
this.
One possible conclusion would be to leave the situation as it is and
direct my energy elsewhere, but my conclusion can also be that I
will protest, or in some other way try to change the situation.
My opinion, incidentally, is that Stoic philosophy fits excellently
with the societal idea of anarchism, but that is another story, which
is covered in the last chapter.
Absolutism?
Assuming we trust the quotations from his work, Zeno used absolutist reasoning from time to time. You are only a wise person if you
are always wise and never fail. The non-wise are bad, and remain so
as long as they still do and think stupid or bad things, even if they
make progress and become more sensible. Gradations in goodness or
wisdom did not exist for him.

dead’. That, in fact, is what Zeno referred to. Also, ‘a little honest’
goes against the general notion of honesty, and ‘a little bit good’
sounds equally paradoxical. So I can well understand what Zeno
and the other representatives of the Early Stoa meant about the
concept of wisdom. It appeals to me, this allergy for ‘halfness’.QE
All the same, it cannot be denied that one person in general behaves
more honestly than another, and there is a difference in the extent
to which people use their powers of reason. It can also not be denied
that learning exists, and the Stoics themselves said that virtue can be
learnt. Zeno and others seemed to want to reserve the term ‘wisdom’
for perfect, untarnished understanding and the behaviour that goes
with it—but we cannot ask them now.
(As an aside … Something quite different that I would have liked to
ask Zeno: is it now ‘an indifferent matter’ that all the old texts have
been lost?)
‘Stoic is boring’

Some things are absolute. There is no such thing as ‘a little bit

Some people think that a life without passion is necessarily boring.
Perhaps it appears so at a superficial glance: a life full of strong
feelings is seen by many people as deep and interesting. But I think
that a number of things are mixed up here: rational, in other words
thought-through, action does not mean that the world of feelings
is left on the back burner. It means that a whole lot of unpleasant
feelings and moods no longer set in because you have become too
sensible for that. If I compare myself with what I was like in my
childhood, I can see clearly that I have become a lot more sensible. I
used to whine a lot if I did not get my way. Now I no longer think
of whining and grumbling as useful reactions, and I try to think of
something more sensible. Maybe I might still get what I want, or
else face the fact that I will not succeed at this moment, and it may
be that a broader understanding leads to my wish vanishing in the
light of day.
In this way, a change in judgment can cause all kinds of unpleasant
feelings to make way for more appropriate moods combined with
activity: beginning a good conversation, sorting out the muddle
in my head by writing things down, or getting involved in activi-

90

91

For if one truth is not more true than another, neither is one falsehood
more false than another, and in the same way one deceit is not more so
than another …QW
Zeno uses as an argument for this a comparison with drowning:
drowning can occur in deep water, but if their head is just under
the surface, people can also drown in shallow water. And a young
puppy that is about to see for the first time (but has not yet done so)
is just as blind as one whose eyes will remain closed for some time.
≤

However, as Plutarch thought, you do not need to see the almostwise as drowning; you can also see them as swimmers who have
almost reached the shore.
≤

ties where I can make use of my ideas instead of letting myself get
dragged along by jealousy, discontentedness, anger, resentment,
stubbornness and so forth. An active attitude to life is not boring
at all.
≤

But is it not boring to live without passionately falling in love? To
me, living without love or friendship is not something for a Stoic.
Here, as I mentioned earlier, it is about oneself ‘giving’ love and
friendship. Whether love and friendship ‘comes back’ from others is
part of the experience, and if it does that is a ‘welcome bonus’.
According to Zeno, falling in love does not contribute to excellence
or happiness as such, but with a good intention it can form part of
the good life, and thereby strengthen the bond between people, so
that eros (love) comes close to arete (virtue, excellence).QR
≤

Lovesickness, where someone allows himself or herself to be carried
along entirely by passions, is of course a different matter—the question is whether such a strong affectation has anything to do with
‘real’ love. For example, greed may form part of it, jealousy can stick
up its ugly head, as can despair and euphoria … Is it boring to live
without this kind of affectation?
≤

Not for nothing is the negative term apatheia absent from Zeno, but
he did use the words euroia biou for his endeavours: ‘richly flowing
life’. The opposite of boring!

X
CYNICS, ATOMISTS AND SCEPTICS

It was not just the Stoics who were occupied with the question of
‘how to live’; Epicurus (Epikouros) and his followers (Epicureans)
Q and the Sceptics were as well. The three schools of thought came
into existence at around the same time, in what is now called the
Hellenistic period, a period running from approximately 323 BC
(the death of Alexander the Great) to approximately 30 BC (the
conquest of Egypt by the Roman Empire).W These schools of thought, however, differed somewhat in opinion in their answers to the
question noted above. In this chapter we start with a ‘retrospective’
on the Cynics, who can be seen as the predecessors of the Stoics,
followed by an outline of Democritus, who had a lot of influence
on Epicurus and also the Sceptics; then Epicurus and the Sceptics
themselves are discussed, with particular attention to their similarities and differences to the Stoics. Finally, we will return once
more to Cicero, who provided commentary on all these people and
schools of thought in the Early Roman period.
Antisthenes, Diogenes and Crates
Socrates is mostly known via his pupils Plato and Xenophon, who
wrote about him; Antisthenes (ca. 446-366 BC) was also one of his
pupils. Antisthenes was in turn a teacher of Diogenes of Sinope (ca.
404-323 BC). The latter often compared himself with stray dogs,
who did not need civilisation in order to live. Kuôn means ‘dog’, and
the ‘kunici’E could be called ‘dog-like philosophers’. Diogenes, who

92

93

was the subject of many tall stories, amusing but at the same time
inspiring, also had a pupil, and that was Crates (ca. 366-286 BC). As
I mentioned earlier, after his arrival in Athens, Zeno was a pupil of
his for a time, not long after which he wrote his Politeia—so some
people say that Politeia was written ‘on the tail of the dog’. Stoicism
was seen as a civilised and improved version of Cynicism (kunism).
≤

The Cynics rejected the contemporary norms and customs, suggesting instead ‘living according to nature’. For Diogenes, that
meant for example that he threw away his drinking-bowl when
he saw a child drinking water out of his hands. The idea of ‘living
according to nature’ was adopted by Zeno and elaborated using a
different emphasis. For humans, it is natural according to Zeno to
make use of reason—whether or not they drunk out of a beaker is
something he undoubtedly considered entirely unimportant.
≤

Another example of the influence of Cynics on Stoicism is the word
adiaphora. This word, which was used by Stoics to mean ‘indifferent
things’ (neither good nor bad), had already been used by Cynics—
but by them to mean ‘things that one can do with confidence although the prevailing custom forbids them’.
≤

The thinking about poverty and riches is also clearly inspired by the
Cynics. Wealth may have been a source of desire and envy for the
masses, but I imagine the Cynics burning money in public (if they
ever had it) or dumping it in the sea. In any case, they chose to live
in poverty. The Stoics, however, considered the whole question of
poverty or wealth unimportant.
Frugality, also called moderation or self-control, is an important
concept both to the Cynics and the Stoics.

together with the titles of their chapters. The titles are enough to
arouse curiosity: Of the Nature of Animals, Of Freedom and Slavery, Of
Belief, Of the Guardian, or On Obedience, Of Odysseus, Penelope and the
Dog, Heracles, or Of Wisdom or Strength . For Diogenes the Cynic he
listed, amongst others: On Virtue, Sisyphus, On Love, A Mendicant,
Anecdotes, Letters . From these, it appears that the Cynics were not
totally averse to theorising, as is often said of them. A major difference to the Stoics, however, is that they did not occupy themselves
with logic and physics, i.e. with further underpinning of their ethical principles. They considered the practice of daily life particularly
important.
This practice was mainly focused on the individual. But a critique of
society can be heard in the following anecdote about Diogenes:
Once he saw the officials of a temple leading away someone who had
stolen a bowl belonging to the treasurers, and said, ‘The great thieves are
leading away the little thief.’R
Democritus
The atomist Democritus was an enormously productive philosopher and scientist. He was born in 460 BC in Abdera and died
probably in 370 BC. He was therefore a contemporary of Socrates
and Plato. His ideas, however, were totally different. Democritus
has become particularly famous for his ‘atomic theory’. He took
from Leucippus this idea that everything is constructed from tiny
individual objects: ‘atoms’. Apart from these, all that existed was
emptiness, i.e. nothing. No gods or mysterious forces exist that you
need to fear.
His opinions are these. The first principles of the universe are atoms and
empty space; everything else is merely thought to exist.T
≤

Although the Cynics were proud of their stray dog lifestyle, they
also wrote books. Diogenes Laërtius listed ten works of Antisthenes

Democritus is, however, also the first of the Greek philosophers of
whom it is known that he paid a lot of attention to the pursuit of
happiness. Inner freedom from phantoms was a precondition for

94

95

≤

this, according to him. Cheerfulness, euthumia, was for him the
same as happiness.
≤

He wrote an enormous amount: tens of works on ethics, natural
philosophy, mathematics, music and poetry, but alas, all of it has
been lost. Just as with Zeno, we must make do with quotations from
others. That is a great pity, particularly because of the contents, but
also because he apparently wrote in a clear, poetic style about all
these subjects.
In reality we know nothing, since the truth is at the bottom.Y
≤

Democritus never included superfluous things in his texts; his ideas
sound clear and never bombastic. He comes across to me as someone
who demanded no more from life than is in it, but nevertheless lived
as intensively as possible.

atheist. He hypothesized that the belief in gods came about because
people did not understand all manner of phenomena and were
afraid of them, for example natural phenomena like thunder and
lightning.
≤

Passion is justified if one pursues pleasant things without doing evil in
the process.
This is different to the standpoint of Zeno, who considered his own
passions wrong (except for eupatheiai), because these states of minds
eliminate reasonable thought, or at least put it on the back burner.
≤

Enjoyment and non-enjoyment are the criteria to determine whether
something is useful or damaging.

The best thing for a person is to live life in a cheerful mood and to get
annoyed as little as possible. One can achieve that by not seeking one’s
happiness in transitory matters.

A lot can be said about this. In comparison with many types of
ethics, this statement is a relief, because no authorities, duties or
prohibitions from on high are there to determine what you can
and cannot do. No fear, either, that you will be punished by these
authorities. Nevertheless, Zeno and his associates would reject this
point of view. But Democritus went further:

Not through their bodies or money do people find happiness but by
sincerity and wisdom.

One must not select every enjoyment, only enjoyment of what is pleasant.

≤

Someone who does wrong is more unhappy than someone who is
wronged.
≤

Democritus was a real bon viveur and was called ‘The Laughing
Philosopher’. But he was no superficial joker, as can be seen from
the quotations above. He was adventurous, travelled a lot and
immersed himself in many subjects. He was very frugal, even more
than the Stoics, because they saw the cosmos more or less as a conscious being with intentions, while Democritus was an outspoken
96

≤

Anyway, it is clear that for Democritus, it was not enjoyment but
cheerfulness (as mentioned earlier) that was the highest goal of life.U
This is clearly something different to egoistical, short-term pleasure, and closer to the Stoic interpretation of happiness or eudaimonia,
where good feelings (eupatheiai) are linked to reasoned thought and
good deeds.
≤

Imperturbable wisdom countervails everything.
97

≤

Just like Plato, Socrates and the Stoics, Democritus saw ‘Evil’ as a
lack of knowledge:
The cause of a wrong deed is that one does not know a better one.
≤

Good is not just committing no injustice, but also not wanting to commit it.
For Democritus, just as for the Stoics, it was about the intention,
not the effect of an act. Someone can, despite the best intentions,
still do something very stupid. Look, then, at these intentions, and
judge someone on them. Sounds sympathetic.
All the same, on further examination the difference between the
intention and the effect of an act is not so important, because from
a Stoic perspective, thinking in terms of guilt is inappropriate. In
the case of an action which has caused trouble or harm, then it is
important in any case to work out what went wrong. That is, in
order to learn from it. If the intention of the action was good, then
something can be learned about its effects. If the intention was not
good, this is more serious, but when soberly examined this too is a
question of what can be learned.
≤

Courage is the start of an action but chance is master of its outcome.
You could get grumpy about this lack of ability to influence outcomes. But Democritus is sensible:
It shows a lack of insight if one does not accept the inevitable things in
life.
A Stoic before the term existed!
≤

Likewise this:
98

Self-control creates a meal to satisfy one’s appetite.
And:
If you do not desire much, then a little will be a lot in your eyes, since
modest desires make poverty as strong as wealth.
Apparently there were plenty of occasions for statements like this
back in those days! In this case, Stoicism went one step further
by saying that wealth was not important. While Cynics, as noted
above, totally rejected riches.
≤

Finally, a call to ‘slow down’ from ancient times; possibly Democritus
addressed these remarks mainly to himself …
He who wants to be cheerful must not concern himself with too many
things, neither in personal life nor in public life, and in all that he does
he must not overreach his power and aptitude; even if chance smiles on
him and seems to open the way to even more, he must be prepared to
resign himself to what he can do and no longer attempt that which he
cannot do. A movable load is, after all, safer than one that is too heavy.
≤

Centuries later, after studying the theory of Democritus, the Roman
orator and philosopher Cicero was left with two questions: what
is matter, and what is the impulse that brings about everything?
Questions to which conclusive answers have still not been found,
but that does not lessen the philosophy of Democritus in my mind;
quite the contrary.
Regarding that opinion, however, Plato is not on my side. It seems
that he once said that he wanted to burn everything Democritus
had written.I What was behind that? And why did he always ignore
him (so it seems) apart from this? Jealousy? Or did he consider the
sensible, worldly theories of this cheerful philosopher a danger to
humanity?
99

Epicurus
Epicurus had a beautiful garden (Kèpos) just outside the city walls
of Athens, where he stayed with his friends. They lived there outside of Athenian society and, in contrast to the Stoics, did not get
involved in politics. ‘Live in secret’ was one of the pieces of advice
that Epicurus gave.
≤

What happened in the Garden? Were they self-supporting or did
they get others to work for them? Did they pick figs from the trees,
just like that? Who prepared the olives? If everyone went to live
with friends in such a garden in a self-supporting manner, wouldn’t
we have an ideal world? Are there not many social problems which
arise from wanting to possess someone else’s garden?
≤

Epicurus lived from 342 to 271 BC. He too wrote an enormous
quantity of books and letters, of which luckily a few letters and
fragments still exist. He took up Democritus’ ‘atomism’, but he was
less clear over atheism than the ‘laughing philosopher’ had been.
The standpoint of Epicurus about the gods is, however, original: the
gods exist—that must be so, as everyone speaks of them—but they
did not interfere with people and had no influence whatsoever on
human society. They did not punish or take revenge. People did not
therefore need to be afraid of them.
≤

The Atomists, Democritus and Epicurus, were controversial enough
in Ancient Greece and Rome, but through the rise of Christianity,
the enmity became even worse. Perhaps this was unsurprising. One
said that no gods exist (not even just one God) while the other asserted that they do exist but that you do not need to take any notice
of them. That is of course not very consistent with obedience, with
religion as a big stick to ensure people are well-behaved. The consequence is nowadays hardly anyone has heard of these philosophers,
who were very famous in their time.
100

The Stoics, at least, mentioned Zeus now and again—but even with
them you (fortunately) find no threats of purgatory, hell or other
violence of the gods.
≤

Also the Hedonism of Epicurus in particular, relying on one’s own
enjoyment, would have pleased neither churches nor governments.
Epicurus was and remained known mostly as a Hedonist, a bon
vivant, in the negative sense but also often in the positive sense. For
Epicurus, ‘enjoyment’, ‘desire’ or ‘feeling good’ was the goal of life.
The word that he used, hédoné, was used to mean both physical
and mental forms of wellbeing, as is the case with our word ‘enjoyment’.
≤

Democritus was a real knowledge-gatherer, who found everything
interesting, both for the knowledge itself and to use the knowledge
for further philosophising. For Epicurus, knowledge was primarily
a means to reduce or eliminate fear: fear of all kinds of natural phenomena, and fear of gods; fear, in other words, based on misunderstanding or lack of knowledge.
In truth, the motive for all that we do is this: having no pain and no fear.
When we succeed in this, it calms the continual storm in our spirit.O
≤

Because it is clear that Epicurus’ writings mostly do not concern
purely physical gratification (although he has no objection to this),
I find the words ‘lust’ and ‘pleasure’ rather misleading. So in some
cases I have chosen to use expressions such as ‘feeling good’ and
‘enjoyment’ instead.
≤

Despite many differences, there are also points of agreement between the Stoics and the school of Epicurus. These are mostly concerned with the quiet, sensible attitude to life that both schools
stand for: taking account of the long term and the realisation that
101

you do not need much, that real happiness is something that you
can only make yourself. Also, both theories take a material universe
as their starting point.
≤

A difference between the two schools is that Epicurus withdrew
with his friends into his Garden, while the Stoics notably concerned
themselves with society. The Stoic wise person was advised to take
part in political live. Epicurus, as mentioned above, had the motto:
‘live in secret’.
≤

Another difference is that the Stoics thought that a good way of
life serves a higher goal, namely the welfare of the cosmos, and that
everything that happens to one is good for something. Epicurus, on
the other hand, like Democritus kept to a ‘simple’ universe, consisting of empty space containing indivisible atoms, moving of their
own accord and joining together. A universe without sense or goal,
in which our world came into existence by chance. The Atomists
exhibited through their physics a sensible, scientific vision, which
is quite compatible with modern scientific theories of evolution and
biology.
≤

Epicurus and his friends were, incidentally, not so sensible in every
domain: Epicurus appears to have behaved like a sort of guru, and
his pupils more or less worshipped him. Perhaps it was Epicurus’
pretension of wisdom and having truth in his hands that elicited
the statement from the Stoics that no one was or had been wise, and
that at most Socrates and Diogenes (the Cynic) came close to it.
≤

Democritus was of course a determinist; to him, there was no difference between chance and necessity. Epicurus could not agree with
this pure-logic version of determinism. In debates with real determinists he used as a rejoinder: ‘Whoever maintains that everything
happens according to fate cannot blame someone who says that not
102

everything happens according to fate. Fate is to blame for this statement itself, according to him.’QP
According to Epicurus, some things happen out of necessity; others
are a whim of fate, while others again are in our hands. The future is
unpredictable because atoms sometimes make strange, unexpected
jumps. This opinion of Epicurus constitutes not only one of the differences between him and the ‘hard-core’ determinist Democritus,QQ
but is also at odds with the determinism of the Stoics.
≤

Epicurus therefore tried to keep hold of the idea of free will by ascribing to atoms the possibility of making small deviations from ‘their
natural directions’ now and again. But how does that resolve the
issue of my free will? Surely it implies that my behaviour too can
be explained by causeless small deviations of atoms? Fine, atomic
movements can perhaps never be predicted completely, but what
difference does that make to me? It still means that my ‘self’ is not
the one pulling the strings.
≤

Not that Epicurus is otherwise so vague! He rejected all fortune-telling. Certainly not all the Stoics did that. Because they postulated
that the future is fixed, many of them thought that it was possible
to predict it. To a certain extent, this is indeed so: weather forecasts, solar eclipses. But in most areas, reality is so complicated that
making accurate predictions would take longer than the duration of
the occurrences they try to predict.
≤

‘Those from the garden’ and ‘those from the colonnade’ were often
at each other’s throats—metaphorically, in any case. The importance (or not) of hédoné was and remains the main bone of contention. While for Stoics reason is at the centre, hédoné (pleasure, i.e. a
feeling) is what mattered most to Epicurus. Epicurus did not occupy
himself with virtues or other moralistic perspectives. For him,
pleasure was the only good and pain the only evil.
103

On pleasure we base everything that we desire and do not desire; it is our
refuge, where feeling is the measure for judging all that is good.
≤

One of the major differences between Epicurus and the Stoics is
therefore that according to Epicurus, enjoyment (hédoné) ultimately
coincides with ‘real’ happiness (eudaimonia), while for Stoics the latter is something more valuable, linked to excellent behaviour.
≤

Given that everyone, according to Epicurus, just aims to feel good
and avoid pain all the time, in his view it is good to examine this in
detail and find out the best way to avoid pain and feel as good as
possible (including in the long term, together with our friends). For
this, he provided a description of reality as he saw it: feeling good is
the motive for everyone, all the time. At the same time, he provided
good advice: do not let yourself be distracted by all kinds of unnecessary fears, take seriously your wish to feel good, as this produces
the best results; put aside all social standards and values and follow
your feelings: those things that provide real ‘sustainable’ good feelings are what to go for.
≤

Of our desires, some are natural and necessary; others are natural but not
necessary; others again are neither natural nor necessary, but are due to
illusory opinion.QW
Epicurus considered natural and necessary the relief of pain, and for
example drinking when you are thirsty. ‘Natural but not necessary’
comprises things which only give variation to pleasure but take
away no (additional) pain, such as eating expensive food. ‘Neither
natural nor necessary’ includes garlands, erecting statues, etc.

stated in terms of wanting to avoid suffering. For example: you
want to eat; another time you want to go for a walk. These are: to
avoid hunger; to avoid a drowsy feeling. You want a snack: to fill a
psychological emptiness, to occupy yourself pleasantly not in a difficult way, to avoid boredom. Not having any pain is, therefore, for
Epicurus a (calm) form of enjoyment. For him, there is no such thing
as a neutral mood.
Epicurus himself, incidentally, had a lot of physical pain: kidney
stones, according to some stories. If that is the case, he must have
had to endure a lot of physical pain.
≤

A simple soup brings just as much pleasure as an expensive delicacy,
once the pain of needing something has been taken away, while water
and bread give the greatest pleasure of all when they come to someone
who needs them.
Epicurus and his friends were, all in all, not a bunch of people gone
astray, wallowing in lust, as some rumours liked to depict the garden’s inhabitants, but sensible, frugally living people who enjoyed
life, striving through philosophy for a body without pain and a soul
without disquiet. A pleasant life full of enjoyment is, according to
Epicurus, not possible for people who live foolish and unjust lives.
From all this, it is clear that simply chasing short-term gratification
is not what Epicurus stood for. Why, then, is that the picture that
(even back then) was painted of him? Could people not stand the
idea that ‘good living’ could be possible in such a simple manner?
≤

Wanting to feel good can, according to Epicurus, always be re-

Pleasure/feeling good is, according to Epicurus, something you
reach when you experience no pain and no fear, and (for your mood
or happiness) you become independent of what is outside of you.
This independence of what is outside of you clearly corresponds
to one of the most important aspirations of the Stoics. All the
same, the latter probably did not often come regularly to Epicurus’
Garden to sit drinking grape juice and eating figs … quite the
contrary. Because he argued that pleasure was the most important

104

105

≤

If we suffer no pain, we have no more need for enjoyment.

motive in life, Epicurus was criticised by many—by Zeno of course,
but it seems that Cleanthes particularly opposed Epicurus. Some,
including StoicsQE but also others, interpreted Epicurus’ ideas in very
vulgar ways in order to discredit him. In ancient times, infighting
was apparently no different to nowadays: the ideas of an ‘opponent’
were and still are often over-simplified rather than made firm before
opposing them.
≤

Epicurus said that the first instinct of a newborn is to aim for pleasure and avoid pain. Zeno, of course, did not agree with this and said
that the first aim of humans is not pleasure but self-preservation—an
innate idea, a judgment. That judgment is combined with a feeling
of pleasure; nature has ‘arranged’ it so that active self-preservation
is a pleasurable activity.QR
While Epicurus saw feelings (aiming for pleasure, avoiding pain)
as the beginning, the initial cause and so the most important one,
the Stoics found that this feeling was ‘merely’ the consequence of a
judgment. For a baby or a young mammal, for example, the (innate)
judgment is that (in order to stay alive) it must drink its mother’s
milk.
≤

Epicurus stated that pleasure does not lend itself to be debated
about; it is a matter of perception. This is another difference to the
Stoics, for whom enjoyment (a feeling) is a consequence of judgments, of thinking. Focusing on pleasure is, according to Stoics
an ‘irrational pursuit of something that appears to be worthy of
desire’. Just as there are illnesses of the body (such as gout, arthritis,
colds and diarrhoea), so there are unhealthy tendencies of the ‘soul’:
ecstasy, superficial amusement, schadenfreude (pleasure derived
from the misfortune of others), etc. So say the Stoics.
Epicurus reasoned very differently: pleasure is simply what everyone
strives for and pain is what everyone tries to avoid. There is nothing
wrong with this, according to Epicurus. But it is important that
people use their power of reason when making choices; if you let
your body choose, without thinking, then it always choose short106

term gratification, which may well in the long term result in a lot
of suffering.
≤

Taking account of the long term does therefore play a role in
Epicurus’ philosophy: sometimes you do something that is not so
pleasant because you know that in the long run you will be better
off because of it. This comparison of short-term gratification versus
avoiding suffering and enabling pleasant feelings in the long term is
called the ‘hedonistic calculus’. A sick person can in some cases only
stay alive by undergoing a painful treatment. Animals, too, sometimes withstand pain to improve their future situation. Epicurus
gave the example of a tortoise that laboriously turns itself over if it
ends up on its back.
≤

In contrast to the Hedonist Aristippus,QT Epicurus warned about
actively seeking pleasurable experiences: you need to watch out for
this. It is much more sensible to try to be satisfied by the absence of
unpleasant feelings (pain, deprivation, need). A complete absence
of unpleasant feelings, according to Epicurus, means that you have
reached the highest form of happiness. While you do not feel one
hundred percent good, some unpleasant feelings remain.
≤

You must consider that the future is not within our power, but also not
entirely outside our power. So we should not firmly count on what it
will bring, nor despair about what it will certainly not bring.
The lifestyle of Epicurus, demanding little or nothing from the outside world, is again very reminiscent of the Stoics. All the more as he
emphasised that many of our needs are not natural but only imaginary needs. With these superfluous needs, we saddle ourselves with
much discomfort. For this reason, Epicurus adhered to the concept
of autarkeia: the ability to do things independently.
We consider it a great benefit to be independent of what is outside of
107

you.

≤

Only accept those needs whose fulfilment lies within your powers.
You can enjoy extra things, but be careful that you do not become
dependent on luxury. Try to become as little dependent as possible
on external factors, so that how you feel is determined as much as
possible by your own actions.
Nothing is sufficient for someone who considers something that is sufficient to be too little.
When considering greedy consumption, Epicurus thought not just
of material things:
A thankless soul makes a being continually desirous of variation in its
way of living.
People want an exciting life, but expect the excitement to come
from outside. They throw themselves into nightlife, go on long
travels and have one relationship after another, but the restlessness
remains. Apparently this consumerist lifestyle already existed in
ancient times.
It is not the stomach that is insatiable, as the masses say, but the wrong
convictions about the unlimited filling of the stomach.
This could be a saying of Zeno, but these really are Epicurus’
words.
Even on the rack the wise man is happy.
This ‘Stoic’ saying is also from Epicurus. At the same time, however,
he said:
The wise man will also feel grief.QY

108

There exist various types of sorrow, and I suspect that in this case
Epicurus meant sorrow coloured by pleasant memories, rather than
sombre, heavy or nagging types of sorrow.
While the Stoics emphasised that passions are nuisances, according
to Epicurus the wise are more susceptible to feelings than others. He
adds that this would not thwart his or herQU wisdom. The question
remains as to whether Epicurus includes strong feelings here, or
only the soft, quiet eupatheiai that the Stoics also spoke appreciatively of. Doubtless there must have been strong differences between
these two schools of thought, which were very influential over a
long period yet criticised each other strongly.
≤

Discussions about pleasure were an important issue for Stoics. What
they particularly objected to about Epicurus and his bon vivant
friends was probably that everything was focused on their own wellbeing. Chrysippus stated that ethics ultimately revolved around
a fundamental choice between pleasure and virtue as the highest
good, because if personal pleasure is the highest good instead of
striving for excellence, values such as friendship or justice lose their
validity.QI
≤

As far as friendship is concerned, Epicurus appeared to consider it
fine. For this philosopher, just as for Aristotle and the Stoics, friendship was very important:
Friendship dances around the world and calls all of us to awaken and
consider ourselves happy.
According to Epicurus, after some time you come to see friends as a
kind of extension of yourself. Through this, at a particular point in
time your self-interest comes to coincide with that of your friends.
This resembles the Stoic description of a friend as ‘another I’. And
this was not idle talk; it is known of Epicurus that he lived in harmony with his friends.
109

All the same, there is a significant difference. The friendship of
Epicurus and his followers was restricted to the Garden, i.e. to his
own group, while the Stoics were socially oriented, and (in theory,
in any case) championed worldwide friendship.

(i.e. to prevent an unpleasant feeling) or, more positively, because
they have learned from experience that it feels pleasant to dedicate
yourself to a cause.

≤

Marcus Tullius Cicero was a Roman who introduced Greek philosophy to Ancient Rome, and in various books gave commentary
on both the Early Stoa and the teachings of Epicurus. He clearly
had more appreciation for Democritus than Epicurus: ‘as long as
Epicurus follows Democritus, he rarely or never blunders’; ‘what
he has to say comes from Democritus’. He considered Epicurus
anti-intellectual, in contrast to ‘he laughing philosopher’. Cicero
considered it totally disdainful to have gratification and (avoiding)
suffering as one’s basic motivation. So it is not surprising that his
sympathy lay not with Epicurus but with the Stoics when it came
to ethics.

The differences between the two schools of thought were even
clearer when it came to justice. Epicurus saw justice, in contrast
to the Stoics, not as something natural or fixed but as a human
construction. According to him, there was once a time when each
person pursued their own interest, bashing in the brains of others
around them.QO Clever people then realised that people could better
serve their own interests by living without these threats, by making
agreements with each other. Unjust actions, after all, always involve turmoil: violence, anger, riots, fear and so on. When looked at
in this way, justice stands in the service of self-interest, desire and
feeling good.
Why, wondered Epicurus, would others such as the Stoics, persevere
with a virtue such as justice if it did not deliver any benefit?WP
≤

Despite this focus on ‘benefit’, Epicurus was not pragmatic, given
his preference (similar to the Stoics and Democritus) for intentions
rather than results:
It is better that a deed turns out wrong despite an accurate judgment
than that a deed turns out right by chance despite a mistake.
≤

Moreover, Epicurus asserted that someone who does not live well
cannot lead a happy existence. Being good and feeling good are
therefore the same for him. Cicero, however, added quite a different
opinion; according to this thinker and orator, pleasant things are
not always the same as good things; an example offered by Cicero
was the fact that people often dedicate or even sacrifice themselves for ‘the good cause’. But that proves nothing, Epicurus would
probably have said. They do that perhaps from a feeling of guilt
110

≤

≤

Cicero considered it contradictory of Epicurus that on one hand he
considered pleasure the most important thing while on the other he
said that luxury food does not give more pleasure than bread and
figs. But from this, all that follows is that Epicurus gave a different
meaning to pleasure than Cicero thought he did. Something broader and more subtle.
Enjoying a piece of dry bread and a glass of water was for Epicurus
more than filling or ‘delighting’ the stomach; it was about a lifestyle focused around enjoyment. Very little is needed to be able to
enjoy. Is this totally disdainful?
One of the things that Cicero resolutely rejected was that Epicurus
seemed to make no distinction between, for example, the enjoyment
of tasty olives and gathering and philosophising with friends. He
created no hierarchy between higher and lower forms of pleasure.
Pleasure is pleasure, end of story—a standpoint with some merit, it
seems to me.
≤

Without needing to divide it into higher or lower forms, pleasure
111

can however still be classified, for example, into the following four
kinds: pleasant in the short-term for yourself, sustainably pleasant
for yourself, pleasant in the short-term for (yourself and) others and
sustainably pleasant for (yourself and) others.
It seems that Epicurus was interpreted by Cicero (and many others)
as if he always meant the first kind: ‘pleasant in the short-term for
yourself’. ‘Even for animals, pleasure is not the most important
motive’, is Cicero’s commentary on the Hedonism of Epicurus, and:
‘How can gods be happy then, as they have no body!’ Ignoring the
issue of gods, this commentary only refers to short-term, individual
pleasure, although everything indicates that Epicurus was mainly
talking about the other three kinds of pleasure. Even he had objections to short-term pleasure for yourself, inasmuch as it may have
damaging consequences in the long term or for others. Enjoying
a feast is harmless provided I do not overeat and I ensure there is
enough left for later, both for myself and for others.
≤

Cicero knew perfectly well that Epicurus himself lived very sensibly,
but he assumed that a wide audience did not understand this. For
some thinkers, Cicero said, their words are better than their deeds;
‘for Epicurus the opposite is the case’.
≤

Someone who says that the time for philosophising has not yet dawned
or has passed is like someone who says that it is too early or too late for
happiness.
Epicurus wrote that in his letter to Menoikeus. People are good
at inventing excuses. That was so for Thales of Miletus (ca. 624 545BC), the first Greek philosopher, or at least the first who became
(or rather remained) famous. There was a story that his mother kept
pressing him to get married. For a long time he kept answering that
it was too soon for that. Until one day his answer was: ‘Now it is
too late for that!’
In any case, that is not true for philosophising.
112

≤

Epicurus summarised his ideas as the tetrapharmakos, the so-called
‘fourfold medicine’; this is as follows: 1. the gods do nothing, 2.
death means nothing, 3. pleasant feelings can be achieved simply, 4.
unpleasant ones can simply be ignored or avoided.
≤

But … if all of this was really so simple, surely after all the intervening centuries this fourfold solution would by now be common
knowledge? Perhaps Spinoza was more realistic at the end of his
Ethica with the observation: ‘All that is excellent is as difficult as it is
rare’.WQ All the same, the words of Epicurus sound encouraging, and
remain worthy of consideration.
≤

Finally it is worth mentioning this: both the Stoics and Epicurus
stated that experiencing discomfort and feeling unhappy comes
from faulty thinking. Both consider, for example, that fear is not
necessary. The Stoics stated in general that fear (just like other
unpleasant feelings) is based on a wrong judgment. Fear of death,
for example, presupposes that death is evil, but that is not so, said
the Stoics, because life and death are ‘of no importance’; what is
important is to live a good life, the rest is unimportant.
Epicurus emphasised that death is literally nothing for us to fear.
He seemed to have somewhat more empathy for people who are
fearful, and tried to reassure them: you do not need to fear death,
because you are not present once it occurs.
The most terrible evil that there is, death, does not touch us at all, since
death is not there while we exist and we no longer exist once death
comes.
Even without fear of death, it is the case for the vast majority of
people that they would like to remain alive. As long as I live, I hope
(in Epicurean terms) to experience pleasant feelings, or (in Stoic
terms) possibilities to live a good life. Active living (Stoic) and enjoying it to the full (Epicurean), yet not attaching myself to that life
113

even though it is the only one for me—that is the Stoic-Epicurean
art of life.
Pyrrho, Arcesilaus, Carneades and Sextus
According to some authorities the end proposed by the Sceptics is insensibility; according to others, gentleness.WW
≤

The Greek verb skeptesthai originally meant ‘to watch attentively’.
The word skepsis meant ‘research’. Plato and Aristotle used it, but for
them it was a way of arriving at the truth. For the Sceptics, skepsis
was more than a means to an end.
≤

Scepticism is the ability to find the opposites both of objects of experience and of objects of thought in any way whatever. Because the opposed
things or reasonings have equal force, we are led first to suspension of
judgment, and then to serenity.WE
≤

A few centuries before the Hellenistic philosophers, there lived
the thinker Parmenides (ca. 500 BC), who was a great influence on
them with his rock-solid philosophy about reality, which he called
‘what-is’.WR He stated that there was only one reality and that it was
eternal, indivisible and unchangeable. With this, he in fact challenged everybody, that is, all the later philosophers. Some philosophers took over parts of his philosophy, such as Democritus, who
changed the presupposition that there was one reality to: there are
endless many individual ‘realities’ (atoms). Plato wrote one of his
longest Dialogues as a response to Parmenides,WT and for the Sceptics
too, the rigorous philosophy of Parmenides sparked many discussions and debates.

Ataraxia, imperturbability, can best be achieved, according to him,
by making no pronouncements on reality (aphasia, not-speaking).
Because of this, we are left with some guesswork, not just about his
life but also his ideas. He was probably influenced in his Scepticism
by the school of Democritus. (Democritus hypothesized that there
were atoms, it is true, but apart from them there was only empty
space and all other assertions rested purely on convention, according to him. His ‘truth’ was therefore very ‘stripped down’.)
≤

The Sceptic type of reasoning can also be seen in the so-called
Sophists of Athens, orators who trained their pupils to ‘philosophise’ in various directions via arguments and rhetoric; for them,
a theory like that of Parmenides must have been a real feast. The
Sophist philosopher Gorgias of Leontini (ca. 480-380 BC) opposed
the teaching of Parmenides in this way:
Nothing is; even if something was, I would not be able to understand
it; and if I did succeed in understanding it, I would not be capable of
informing others of it.WY
≤

The Sophists saw the possibility of arguing both for and against
something as a useful skill, for example for making political or
judicial pleas. The Sceptics, however, took it as very serious philosophically that two opposing assertions can often both be defended
equally well: this showed to them that neither one assertion nor its
opposite could be claimed as truth.
≤

The first fully-fledged Sceptic was Pyrrho of Elis (Purrhôn, ca. 360270 BC). Pyrrho intentionally committed none of his ideas to paper.

It is not so surprising that Stoicism was strongly criticised by the
Sceptics: the fact is, the Stoics thought that you could arrive at the
truth through research, and that truth revealed itself through clarity. By this, the Stoics were real dogmatists.
As I already outlined in Chapter III, in addition to the ethics that
this book focuses on, the Stoics had an extensive physics, epistemology and thorough logic. Through these, they thought they could

114

115

≤

thoroughly underpin their pronouncements, including in the fields
of ethics and metaphysics.
The Stoics believed, as many did, that certain knowledge was
possible, i.e. that you could fathom the nature of reality through
understanding and insight. Anything you understand is reliable,
according to them. This is a very arguable idea. People often ‘understand’ things that are later refuted, i.e. that they ‘understand’ very
differently later. Understanding something is no guarantee for its
accuracy. The riposte of the Stoics to this would of course be: you
therefore did not really understand that the first time. But a Sceptic
would then answer: how do you know for sure that this is not still
the case? And so on, ad infinitum.

In the same manner, regarding everything, he insisted that nothing
really exists and that people do everything on the basis of agreement
and custom.’WU So for Pyrrho, even the atoms disappear out the back
door. There are tall tales about him, saying that he did not go out of
the way of danger: steep hills, wagons heading towards him, dogs
… ‘He was, however, always saved by his friends.’ But there was a
good chance that he would watch out sometimes—he lived to about
ninety.
Pyrrho, in spite of his criticisms, had appreciation for other philosophers, particularly Democritus. But also writers such as Homer
carried his seal of approval.

≤

The Sceptics found that Stoic assertions were inadequately underpinned, but how on earth could you convince a Sceptic that one
judgment is correct and another wrong? That would (almost certainly) never succeed, by definition.

For Pyrrho, supreme well-being consisted of having no more aspirations. Perhaps on his journeys he was influenced by Eastern philosophers. The Stoics were more moderate; they ‘merely’ found that
too strong aspirations such as passions and desires were damaging.
In other words: wishing, not yearning.

≤

≤

Yet there were also areas of agreement. The most important agreement concerns the importance ascribed to inner peace, ataraxia, as
also shared by the school of Epicurus. Also, the Sceptics, like the
Stoics, started from the idea that feelings are based on judgments,
and considered strong feelings damaging. The Sceptics’ solution for
the phenomenon of strong feelings was however not to prevent and
refute false judgments but to suspend judgment itself, getting rid of
the whole concept of certainty and the need for certainty. Through
this, rage and other strong affectations would no longer exist.
Thinking that you can or do possess the truth makes people fanatical and agitated, causing arguments and other misery, according to
the Sceptics. You would not explode in anger over something you
are uncertain about. Suspend your judgment, and ataraxia will be
your reward.

Roughly five centuries later, there lived Sextos Empeirikos, better
known under his Latin name, Sextus Empiricus (ca. 150-220 AD).
Little is known about Sextus himself. Here, too, we must suspend
our judgments. He came from Greece or Libya, was educated in
Alexandria or Athens and probably practiced as a doctor alongside
his Sceptic philosophical activities.
He wrote a number of treatises on Scepticism, which fortunately, in
contrast to the works of many others, are still in existence. One of
his works begins as follows:

≤

When people are looking for something, the likely outcome is either
that they will find it; or that they will give up the search and admit it
cannot be found; or that they will carry on looking for it.WI

Pyrrho asserted ‘that nothing is beautiful or ugly or just or unjust.

He calls those who think they have found the truth dogmatists;
these include for example the Aristotelians, the Epicureans and
the Stoics. The Sceptic Academics of the school of Plato belong to

116

117

≤

the second category, because they presupposed that the truth was
unknowable, while the ‘real’ Sceptics, according to Sextus, keep
searching for it. The latter can therefore not be caught in the paradox that dogmatists like to throw at Sceptics: ‘Is it true according
to you that truth does not exist?’ These ‘real’ Sceptics are those who
follow in the footsteps of Pyrrho, suspending all judgment, including judgment on the questions of whether or not truth exists and
whether it could ever be found.
≤

Sextus quotes approvingly from Anaxarchus of Abdera, a pupil
of Democritus: ‘We know nothing; we do not even know that we
know nothing.’
≤

Although the Stoics were called dogmatists by Sextus Empiricus
and other Sceptics, they were very critical in their assumptions.
As noted, they had a very extensive theory of knowledge (epistemology). This primarily concerns the concept mentioned earlier,
‘assent’.WO According to the Stoics, we do not simply give our assent
to impressions, but to particular thoughts that we connect to these
impressions. Such a thought could be ‘there is a glass of grape juice
on the table’, but also ‘that juice looks tasty’. Each impression or
observation (in any case for adults reasonably capable of thought) is
tied to a thought, a judgment.
Once you know (understand) that something is not correct, say the
Stoics, you no longer give your assent to the impression with the
incorrect judgment. You then give your assent to a new judgment
(‘there is red ink in that glass’). Sceptics take a few major steps
further: they refuse in any case to assent to impressions, and suspend
every judgment. At least in theory. They might well drink grape
juice.
≤

Sextus studied Stoicism and other dogmatic theories thoroughly;
in his arguments he often uses Stoic logic, which he then criticised
elsewhere.
118

The term epoché, the central idea of the Pyrrhonist Sceptics, suspension of judgment, comes notably from Zeno. He found suspension
of judgment suitable for ‘the non-evident’. Even the Stoically wise
suspends her judgment—but not always.
≤

What the Sceptics enjoyed attacking was the Stoic supposition that
there are particular impressions which are self-evident (kataleptikos,
‘gripping’ impressions).EP In other words, the idea of the Stoics that
it is theoretically possible (at least for the Stoically wise) to know
particular things for certain. And what of course totally rubbed the
Sceptics up the wrong way were utterances from the Stoics such as
‘the wise are never wrong’.
The Sceptics (particularly the contemporaries of the Early Stoics,
‘those of the Akademeia’, such as Arcesilaus and Carneades, and a
number of centuries later Sextus Empiricus) readily made use of the
critical theory of knowledge of the Stoics. In fact, they continued
along the same lines in some areas.
≤

According to the Stoics, Scepticism leads to inactivity and therefore
can never lead to a good and happy life. This was (of course) denied
by the Sceptics: the idea that you do not need to live according to
dogmas does not mean that you may not choose; indeed, according
to the Sceptics it simplifies the choices in daily life: it makes them
all immaterial. In precisely this way, it creates unprecedented inner
peace. Ataraxia. A Sceptic can make all manner of pronouncements
about reality, such as that it is warm or cold, but:
If he now and then says that something is so, he always means that
something appears so.EQ
≤

They declared the dogmatic philosophers to be fools, observing that
what is concluded ex hypothesi is properly described not as inquiry but
assumption.EW
119

≤

Carneades (ca. 214-129 BC) of the Akademeia must have been an
enthusiastic philosopher. According to Diogenes Laërtius he had a
very loud voice, was unconcerned about clothing, let his hair grow
long and never went out to eat, so that he could devote all his time
to his work. It was said that his friends even had to help him use his
hands when eating because he was so possessed by his thoughts.
≤

Carneades argued against Chrysippus so often and so ‘successfully’
that he apparently often wondered out loud what would have become of him without Chrysippus. He was also ‘lucky’ that this gifted
thinker was no longer around to counterattack him—Chrysippus
died when Carneades was just seven years old.
The Stoic Antipater fiercely attacked Carneades (in writing) and
would not budge an inch, but later Stoics (such as Panaetius) did
allow themselves to be influenced by some of Carneades’ arguments.
≤

One of Carneades’ criticisms of Stoicism was that Stoics made no
distinction between aims and means: living according to nature is
the aim, and that aim can be achieved by living according to nature;
virtue is the aim, and that aim can be achieved by … virtue itself.
Panaetius produced a refutation of this objection: the object of an
art does not always lie outside that art. Wisdom must not be compared to the art of navigation or medicine, he thought, but with
acting or dance. The activity and the aim are the same. You dance
for dancing’s sake.
An example which I immediately think of when it comes to coincidence of aims and means is the expression: ‘there is not a way to
peace; peace is the way’. The aim of ‘a pleasant world’ can only be
achieved by doing plenty of pleasant things.

example: Imagine you sell your house. Do you do so fairly for a
low price, or unfairly for a high price? This is, though, a very weak
example. Antipater, the Stoic, gave a simple answer to this: selling
fairly is the best and happiness has nothing to do with monetary
advantage.
≤

Sometimes Carneades and other Academics are called ‘moderate
Sceptics’ compared to the more radical Pyrrhonists. The eighteenthcentury philosopher David Hume, for example, classified them in
this way. This was because they took what is ‘reasonable’ or ‘believable’ as the foundation for daily activities. They also considered
one thing more probable than another. Because they were firmly of
the opinion that the truth would never be found, at other times they
were called radicals. Pyrrhonists, in contrast, set aside the question
of whether the truth would ever be found. Who, then, were the
‘real’ Sceptics?
≤

As noted earlier, Carneades made a journey to Rome in 156 BC with
two other philosophers, EE generated interest in Greek philosophy
there and gave two speeches as an illustration of Sceptic thought:
one in which he defended the position that the State always acts
justly, and the next day another equally impassionate and welldefended speech in which he argued the opposite. The authorities
did not thank him for the latter …
≤

Virtue and interests are the same, according to the Stoics, but
Carneades did not agree with this either. He came up with an

Sextus Empiricus, just like the Stoic Aristo of Chios,ER attacked the
Stoic theory of preference: saying that health is an indifferent matter, even though people prefer health, is inconsistent. Whether particular things are good or bad depends, according to Sextus, on the
circumstances. He produced an example where health can be disadvantageous: if you are called up by the army because of it, while sick
people were excused from it. (From which it appears that Sextus was
not afflicted by pugnacity.) His conclusion was: ‘There therefore
exists nothing that is good or bad by nature’. Everyone has a dif-

120

121

≤

ferent understanding of what is good; there is no generally accepted
‘goodness’. Peace of mind can be obtained by not just accepting or
rejecting things but subjecting everything to a critical gaze.
People who think that good or bad exist by nature have after all an
unhappy life, while those who do not know for certain and suspend
their judgment go through life in a pleasurable and easy manner.ET
≤

Striving for wealth or fame or pleasure makes people bad and therefore these things cannot be good of themselves, reasoned Sextus.
That sounds logical. Funny, though, that Sextus himself now talks
in terms of good and bad!
≤

Sextus gave a clear example, probably from his medical practice,
of how particular ideas cause particular emotions: someone who is
operated on (without anaesthetic …) probably only feels the pain of
the cut, while a third party who watches perhaps faints by seeing
blood and thinking about all manner of disasters, not because of
the pain (because he does not suffer from it) but from his thought
that pain is bad. So the disquiet from an opinion about a particular
‘evil’ can sometimes be worse than the disquiet arising from the socalled evil itself. Up to this point there is hardly any difference to
the Stoics. But his remedy is different: someone who suspends his
judgment about everything to do with opinions harvest the most
complete happiness.
Suspending judgments boils down to ‘life without answers’, accepting that (probably, for the time being) no ‘answers’, in the sense of
certainties, can be found.

≤

Sextus disparaged the ‘ethicists’:
After all, the art of living which exists (according to their judgment) and
brings happiness (according to their opinions) is not one, but consists of
several inconsistent version, such as that of Epicurus, that of the Stoics
and that of the Peripatetics. We must either practise all at the same time,
or just one, or none at all. Practising all of them is impossible because of
their contradictions; what one prescribes as preferable, another forbids
as reprehensible, and it is not possible to pursue and avoid something at
the same time.EY
But how can you choose? On what grounds? Sextus could find
no criterion to make a choice between them. With this, Sextus
remained within ‘certainty thinking’ because there are no certain
grounds to choose one or the other, we are simply unable to choose
the best. He was therefore not a pragmatist or eclectic who says: ‘we
can select a bit here and a bit there; if it all does not form a consistent
theory, that is not bad as long as it works.’
≤

Understanding something, according to Sextus, is the same as
agreeing with it. What does a Stoic mean when she or he understands the saying of an Epicurean, ‘pleasure is good’? Has the Stoic
really understood this saying or not? If so, according to Sextus, then
she or he must also think that the Epicurean is right and admit that
the Stoic is wrong. And if not, then she or he cannot argue against
it.

≤

According to Sextus, people remain susceptible to ‘involuntary and
irrational emotional changes’, but they can keep control of their
feelings. The strength of Stoicism to me is that feelings do not need
to be kept under control as such, but through critical reflection you
can ensure that only quiet, pleasant feelings remain.
122

123

can passions, divorced from all forms of thinking, lead to a choice?

XI
STRONG AFFECTATIONS, GOOD
FEELINGS

Oh, what good it would do many people to get out for once: not out of
their environment, but out of themselves.Q
Throughout the ages there have been philosophers and other
thinkers who totally disagreed with the Stoics. The Stoic theory
of passions, in particular, was the subject of opposing opinions.
One of the opponents was David Hume (1711-1776), a Sceptic who
was called ‘le bon David’ by his friends in the circles of the French
Enlightenment Philosophers, including Denis Diderot.
≤

According to David Hume, reason has no power of expression over
passion. Reason can, according to him, make no choice at all, not
even between ‘the destruction of the world and a scratch on my
finger’. That arises because reason in its standard form is completely neutral; to make a choice, humans need passions, according to
Hume.W
But passions, as the Stoics saw them, do not lead to a choice or a
judgment; they are a judgment. David Hume, unlike the Stoics,
apparently saw feeling and reason as two phenomena separate from
each other. Logically he would therefore not agree that feelings are
judgments. The question is what passions are: what can they possibly be if no judgment, no grain of reason lies in them? How, then,
124

≤

Reasoning and feeling are two ways of thinking. That is how the
Stoics saw it, and they were not the only ones; even nowadays there
are many philosophers and scholars who look at it in this way.
Feeling could be called ‘fast thinking’, ‘thinking on autopilot’ or
‘thinking with exclamation marks’, while reasoning is a form of
slow thinking, thinking with question marks. ‘Fast thinking’ consists of readymade judgments, conclusions of earlier thinking, built
up through life experience combined with innate ideas.
Attempts at Stoic reflection involve (very) slow journeys of thought—but I would be better off starting them after I have jumped
out of the way from fright (via ‘fast thinking’) and the falling tree
has landed beside me.
≤

If feelings can be seen as conclusions of earlier thinking, what David
Hume said, ‘without feelings we would never be able to make decisions’ could be reworded as ‘without conclusions of earlier thinking
we would never be able to make decisions’. It seems obvious to me
that this is the case. It seems clear to me that the Stoics did not mean
that we must think without feeling anything at all, but that it is
important to think critically and sensibly (and preferably wisely) so
that (because thoughts and feelings are directly connected to each
other) our feelings also can be quiet, beautiful and pleasant.
≤

The contrast between feelings and reason that many people talk
about is a false contrast; what is at issue is inconsistency between
ideas that are more thought through and those that are less so. The
less consistency, the more confused the feelings and the more often
‘feelings’ and ‘reason’ seem contradictory, on superficial consideration. It can happen that someone’s ‘head’ and ‘heart’ give different
advice, but ‘heart’ in this case only means ‘reactions learned from
ideas acquired earlier’; ideas that with a certain amount of effort can
be retrieved and changed.
125

≤

Someone who reacts emotionally feels they are in the right—as
strong feelings are associated with ‘knowing for sure’. To react in a
level-headed manner you must first think about it. Seeing feelings
as conclusions of earlier thinking makes criticism of the ideas lying
behind them possible and sensible.
The fact that my feelings can be changed means that I do not to
submit to them if they ‘attack’ me, and it also means that I cannot
use ‘feelings’ as an excuse. A feeling can, after all, only serve as an
excuse if it were unchangeable.
If I retranslate my feelings as ideas, and I accept that others can have
different ideas, this can improve communication and therefore cooperation and friendship.
≤

In this chapter a number of feelings are examined; what can be said
about them based on Stoic ideas?
Anger
Of all affectations, anger is the most striking and damaging. In a
fit of anger, people can do violence to other people or themselves,
they can destroy things, or carry out other ‘stupidities’. Animosity
and fieriness appear to be bad for one’s own health (for the heart).
People who are very indignant, who let themselves be carried along
by their anger, also run the risk of generating anger and indignation
in others, by harsh words, slanging-matches, destructive behaviour,
harsh or violent actions, etc. Even if only for these purely practical
reasons, it is worth the effort of breaking the habit of becoming
angry, not by suppressing anger but by not letting it go so far that
you become furious.

is important to realise how small my powers to do this are. Yet it
is always worthwhile, because applying myself to what I consider
good is the best thing I can do—so I can in any case be satisfied
about that. And sometimes, small differences can suddenly have big
consequences.
As for all passions, it is the case that only insight can prevent a fit of
anger or cause it to disappear. The insight, that is, that circumstances are what they are, that people are the way they are—even though
both people and circumstances can change in the future. How far,
and in what direction, the changes might go I once more cannot
control.
≤

It is sometimes said about anger that it is good to express it, to
relieve your feelings. As if anger is a balloon that you can deflate
so that you can think sensibly again. But others, not only Stoic
philosopher but also contemporary psychologists and neurologists,
including Daniel Goleman, maintain that expressing anger has a
contrary effect: someone gets ‘charged up’ and becomes even angrier. Actively cooling down by dealing with the causes of anger is
better, according to this interpretation.
≤

Someone who makes themselves extremely angry often has the tendency to maintain their anger out of fear of losing face. The anger
itself is of course not Stoic; the shame related to it even less so. So,
if I nevertheless let myself be carried away by a bout of anger, then
recognising my clumsiness is the best thing I can do.
Only the (virtual) Stoic sage never makes a psychological slip-up.
≤

Behind anger lies the thought that I am being disadvantaged, in
combination with the illusion that I am still able to intervene.
However, if things turn out differently to what I had wanted,
the only thing that I can do is try to influence ‘future causes’. It

What is the situation with ‘justified’ anger, for example about social
injustice? In most political and idealistic groups (including activist
groups) and social movements it seems to be part of the deal to get
angry about all kinds of wrongs. Because it frequently does not
involve being personally disadvantaged but expressing indignation
about others’ disadvantage, this type of anger seems more justified,

126

127

≤

noble even. But when soberly looked at, what does this anger deliver,
for me or the world? Nothing at all! The same things (taking direct
action, demonstrations, giving out pamphlets, discussing with
other people) could have been done without this anger. Perhaps
taking a ‘Stoic’ attitude would have benefitted these activities and
in any case the activists would have felt better doing so.
It is not for nothing that justice had an important place in the Stoics’
list of virtues. Anger over injustice is not necessary, it is enough (and
more appropriate and effective) to actively strive for justice.
≤

First ensure that your anger has gone and then improve the outside
world. Socrates had a similar attitude: he waited until his anger
had subsided before he criticised someone, because he suspected
that during a fit of anger he would not be able to think and act
justly. Anger is nothing more than a fit of madness, a quick way
of thinking, judging and acting, which mostly only has negative
consequences.
Perhaps rage (speaking loudly, clearly saying ‘the truth’) can sometimes have good pedagogic results, giving those to whom the rage
is directed an impulse to think things over (from which they might
change their behaviour). But then let me ensure that there are
no connotations in my words, even though I raise my voice. Let
me ensure that I am sensible and act from insight and overview,
including in activism, so that while I may not yet have changed
the world, I do change a very small part of it, a part that is very
important to me. Moreover, others will listen better to me if I speak
soberly and with consideration, and react in a less agitated manner,
increasing the chance that what I am trying to achieve really will be
achieved.
≤

Surely you would not get angry at a rain shower? You can look at
other people in the same way: they form a part of the world outside
you. If they think, judge or want something different to you, this
has specific causes. Your anger will make little change to this. Better
use the energy instead to obtain insight into these causes.E
128

≤

But some people do get angry about the weather. Or about fate,
the universe or whatever; something that apparently (so they think)
wants to obstruct them, something that has evil intentions for
them, or at least disadvantages them.
Even though nearly everyone can see the irrationality of this, for
most people it is difficult to escape this way of thinking entirely.
That is to say: many people find it difficult to react without anger
or annoyance to bad luck—they suffer from a naive and egocentric
world view.
≤

Indignation contains an impulse for revenge. By following this
impulse, people maintain the spiral of violence (or at least of anger)
and tensions remain between individuals and groups.
Years ago, I came across a saying of Abel Herzberg: ‘You are only
really an anti-Nazi when you are no longer indignant.’R He tried
to understand why SS members behaved the way they did: he considered that understanding their beastly behaviour contributes to
solutions.T For many people, ‘understanding’ sounds like ‘explaining away’, but this is of course not the case at all here. Here, understanding means: trying to get insights into damaging behaviour in
order to contribute more effectively to the subsequent prevention of
this behaviour.
≤

In short, anger is never sensible: if you feel capable of changing
what annoys you then you do not need to become angry, and if
you realise that you cannot change it then anger has no point at all.
And if you do not know if you can change the situation or not, you
would be better off thinking about it instead of spending your time
being angry.
≤

And if it feels good to express your anger? This shows you were
already angry. This ‘Hedonistic argument’ does not negate my plea
to prevent anger. Never getting angry at all feels a lot better, after
129

all.

≤

Fear

The Stoics naturally do not deny that dangerous situations exist.
The solution for this is however not the passive ‘being afraid’, but
as with all other strong or nagging feelings it is active application
of one or more of the virtues. In this case, the aim is not to be concerned in the sense of worrying, but alert and cautious. ‘Courage’ is
also a Stoic virtueY that can be appropriate in threatening situations.
Recognising (and facing the reality of) how threatening (or not) the
situation is could also be called ‘courageous’.
≤

There are various situations which, when combined with un-Stoic
thoughts, lead to fear. One kind relates to physical existence (fear of
discomfort, illness and death), another with social life: fear of rejection by a loved one or friend, of exclusion from society, or a general
fear of not being considered worthy by others. Seneca and Epictetus
in particular gave many ‘tips’ on facing up to these kinds of fears.
≤

From the fact that people exist (and have existed) who do not (and
did not) worry about death, you can conclude that ‘being afraid of
dying’ is not an essential human characteristic. It is just a possibility. An obvious way of dealing with fear of death is to try to think
of other ideas and in so doing generate other feelings.
≤

Earlier, I mentioned flinching as a useful reflex. Pulling your hand
back quickly if you burn it on a hot pan seems like ‘appropriate’
behaviour to me. A Stoic has no intention of self-mutilation.
It is a different situation when someone is jumpy, i.e. flinches even
if there is no physical danger. In that case, flinching comes not
from useful innate cautionary ideas but judgments made during the
course of one’s life. And once more it is the case that these alarming
thoughts can be investigated and the jumpiness will disappear if
more sensible thoughts take their place.
130

Fear originates as merely a rapid conclusion, on the basis of judging
the situation you find yourself in, to flee or hide, or at least to keep
a low profile. It would be nice if that is all it was: after concluding
‘beware, danger!’ you find a safe place, feel secure and fall asleep.
Who knows, maybe that is how it works for many animals. Once
I found a mouse (which later turned out to be perfectly healthy)
which had hidden behind a suitcase which was open with its lid
against the wall. Under the lid, the animal clearly felt safe enough
to fall into a deep sleep. I picked up the mouse carefully and instead
of panicking it remained asleep!
For people, however, the situation is often different. Because we
are good at anticipating, which is often useful, we are also good at
constructing scary visions. Our fantasy easily goes into overdrive.
We remain stuck in a ‘scared’ situation unless and until we actively intervene against fearful fantasising. So it is really about constructing a new warning signal: a signal that warns ‘hey, watch out,
your feelings are running away, take action!’
Feeling guilty
Feelings of guilt are focused on the past, even though the past
cannot be changed. This instantly shows that feeling guilty is not
an effective or appropriate reaction. Instead of (passively) feeling
guilty, for example that I have taken too little action to improve
the world, I would be much better off (actively) thinking about the
question of whether this is in fact the case, and if it is, what sort of
good things I could do (and then do them).
≤

Or do I first need to have felt guilty in order to arrive at the idea that
I can do more for the world? No, quite the opposite! Look at it the
other way around: imagine that you are helped by somebody. What
would be nicer, that someone does this out of interest and with
pleasure, or that someone does it to try to escape his or her feelings
of guilt?
Thinking that activities such as ‘helping people’ or ‘improving the
131

world’ only happen because of feelings of guilt is to deny the social
side of human nature. This social side is far from fully developed and
is sometimes totally damaged, but that does not detract from the
fact that people by their nature tend to help each other.U
≤

Of course, it is possible that I do things with the best intentions and
yet they turn out badly. In that case it is clear that I have done my
best and that feelings of guilt are misplaced. But even if it is the case
that I could (momentarily) not manage to do something good, if I
therefore did not do my best, even then feeling guilty is uncalledfor. Apparently I could not do other than ‘not do my best’. If I now,
with my new understanding, were presented with the same choice I
would do it differently, i.e. better. That is what is important.
≤

own conscience. ‘I won’t allow myself to do that, I must live this
way or that.’
≤

Of course, everyone has ideas about what is valuable (good) and
what is objectionable (bad). That could be called a conscience. But
the existence of an authority (of any sort) is baseless and can in no
way be substantiated philosophically. This is also true for the authority of one’s own conscience.
Helping someone else or improving the world are things that I can
do simply as a result of striving to make something good and pleasant out of my life. An authority or sense of duty is not necessary for
this. If I act based on wishes rather than a sense of duty, what I do
will probably turn out significantly better for others, for the world
and also for myself.

Feeling guilty is simply counterproductive. People who feel guilty
often allow it to get on top of them and withdraw into their shells.
And it is also often the case that people feel guilty but still keep
doing whatever they feel guilty about. For example, they feel guilty
about driving a car, eating meat or living a life of luxury, but they do
not want to give up these things. The guilty feelings then seem to be
a kind of redemption, as if their behaviour becomes less damaging
because they feel guilty.

‘Ought to’ comes from nowhere, as if it is something external. I do
not seem to be responsible for it. With feeling, something similar
is up: ‘I act from my feelings’—here too, it is as if I am not totally
accountable for such actions. It is much clearer to use the word
‘want’. I want this, not that, for such and such reasons. Someone
can be held to account for what they want. This makes things clearer.

≤

≤

It also often happens that people feel guilty about situations that
they themselves never contributed to. They feel guilty, for example,
about hunger in other parts of the world, a friend who is ill or a
lonely aunt.
Feeling guilty indicates that I think: I really ought to have helped. Even more: I ought to have wanted to help! There is nothing
wrong with the impulse to help, but where does that smothering,
unhappy-making ‘ought to’ come from? If ‘ought to’ does not refer
to one or other supposed authority (a god or commandment, a boss,
a father, a grandmother, a tradition, an ancestor, a government) and
the recognition of this authority, then it apparently refers to one’s

A guilty feeling is a nagging feeling: I ought to have done something other than what I did, or I ought to want something other
than what I want. I failed, I am a bad person. If I think that about
myself, why then do I not make a different choice?

132

133

≤

≤

According to primate researcher Frans de Waal, subjection to authority is an important phenomenon for the development of feelings.
Guilt and shame are clear examples of this. Guilt can be traced
back to fear of punishment and essentially boils down to punishing
yourself in the hope of being spared by those in power. Frans de

Waal describes in Good Natured how for social animals that live in
hierarchically organised groups, guilt arises from fear of the anger
of those higher up the social ladder. This sounds plausible. Guilt is,
then, simply fear of getting told off, getting a bite or a snarl. Even if
you get the ‘bite’ or ‘snarl’ only from yourself.

I actually did not want’.I
≤

Continuing to act based on guilty feelings leads to dissatisfaction
or discontentment. This is more of a mood than a strong burst of
feeling.

A consumption-based and therefore passive attitude, an attitude in
which we think that the world outside ourselves is responsible for
our well-being, makes us become and remain dissatisfied. It is never
good, never enough, it could always have been better—that is what
we think.
This does not always involve eating and drinking and other sensory
enjoyment, or having the latest computer, the fastest bicycle or the
best holiday; it can also involve aesthetic enjoyment, literature, art,
scientific articles or lectures—even philosophy. The consumptive or
passive aspect lies in the judgment that we need these things, this
holiday or those lectures to feel good. So then we are dissatisfied if
we miss this lecture, or if we have no money for that computer or
those fancy foods.
Moderation or frugality is also named as one of the important virtues for Stoics. I do not like the term ‘moderation’ because it suggests something needs to be moderated, which is not the case for
someone who has adopted an active Stoic attitude. Because of this,
I prefer the term ‘frugality’. This expresses the idea that a little is
enough for someone.

≤

≤

Through self-sacrifice, someone can effectively choose this.
Someone, for example, may consider it important to remain with
her ill father but would also like to go to a concert with a friend.
She would have chosen the concert if her father had not been ill,
i.e. in an alternative universe, but here and now in this universe her
father is ill. It is no use to grumble later: ‘I really wanted something
different’. Someone who does this is trying to live in two universes
at the same time.
Shall I remain with my father because I think this is good and
choose to do so? In that case, I will make something pleasant out of
it! Or I will go out with my friend and make something pleasant out
of that? Whatever I choose, it seems that it is what I wanted. ‘It is
not possible to choose something (including doing something) that

A Stoic obtains satisfaction from activity instead of consumption.
This to me does not mean that a Stoic cannot enjoy eating or reading. Enjoyment is not an aim in itself but a welcome bonus. The art
is to enjoy it without getting attached to it: always remaining alert,
not sitting back and letting things happen.

134

135

≤

The ability to possess the idea of doing something wrong and needing to be punished for it—from which guilt arises—is no doubt
innate in humans. This feeling, however, does not have to develop,
and if a guilty feeling nevertheless arises in my head, I can once
again refute this self-judging notion by critical thinking. What is
worth keeping, because it is an appropriate reaction, is a realisation
that things that I used to do in a particular way can perhaps be
done differently next time. That is simply learning, building life
experience.
Dissatisfaction and discontentment

Shame
Thoughts that lead to shame are also inadequate ideas. I see shame
as a feeling arising from the fear of not belonging, i.e. from thoughts along the following lines: I must make a good impression,
they need to like me, I must ensure that they value me. Shame arises
when I have the idea that I have failed and that others will reject

me because of it. While for a Stoic, the key is to do your best to be a
good person, according to your own values; whether others consider
you strange or you become terrifically popular is of no importance
at all.
The Cynic, Crates, once got Zeno, who had just become a pupil of
his, to walk along a busy street with a dripping pot of lentil soup.
This was to teach him not to be concerned about the opinions of
other people on unimportant matters.
≤

If you cannot be the way you want to be, then it remains the case
that you did your best and continue to do so. Someone whose mental faculties deteriorate because of age or illness needs not be ashamed of this, for the perfectly simple reason that s/he can do nothing
about it. And someone who could have done something about his or
her thoughts becoming hazy, because of drunkenness or something
similar, also need not be ashamed, because s/he can ensure that
things will go better in future. Looking back can be good, to learn
from the past, and then to make a new plan for the future.
≤

Feelings such as shame often mean you allow something to get on
top of you, instead of getting busy. Is something impossible? Then
pay no more attention to it. If it is possible, then get busy with it. In
both cases there is ample opportunity to live and learn.
Despondency
When Stoics talk of appropriate behaviour, this would never
include despondency. If I am despondent, I let myself be led by my
feelings, but my feelings lead to nothing. It cannot get more passive
than this!

his head, resulting in a lack of energy. These could include thoughts
such as ‘why should I do something, everything is pointless’ or ‘I
will never achieve anything’, combined with heavy demands and
self-judgments along the lines of ‘I really want to achieve a lot in
my life, otherwise I regard myself as a failure’.
≤

Changing your behaviour is a question of hard work, just like slimming or getting rid of an addiction; good intentions are not enough.
There are plenty of examples of how difficult it seems to be. People
often know how bad something is but still keep doing it. A despondent mood can, in spite of all its misery, become a habit. Kicking
this habit requires courage. Seeing life from a sunnier perspective
can be quite a feat for some people. Stoic insights can undoubtedly
help with this: helping you no longer to sit around waiting for happiness, but to set about the task yourself.
≤

Besides heavy despondency, there is a lighter version. People (apart
from Stoic and other sages) spend a lot of the day worrying about
all sorts of little things. Small inconveniences, minor setbacks. We
react to the outside world as if it is, or ought to be, as controllable
as our inside world. We mark out a path in our thoughts, but the
real path seems to be full of bumps and potholes; pitfalls are present and highway robbers can even attack. We set our aims and are
permanently en route. We consider that these bumps and potholes
frustrate our goals, but we should include the need to cope with
them in our goals, because these obstacles (flat tyres and other bad
luck) are part and parcel of life.
Jealousy

Despondency is a mood in which very little thinking takes place, so
that someone in this state does not quickly think of a solution to get
out of it. Discouraging thoughts (possibly old ones) go round her or

Jealousy is a combination of fear and anger. Fear that someone
else has beat you to it, fear that you are found wanting because of
someone’s actions, and anger towards the other person (or people)
because of this.
At the root of jealousy lie thoughts such as the idea that possessions

136

137

≤

are important, the idea that you have a right to something, or the
idea that other people are not friends but competitors (or even enemies). All these ideas are at odds with Stoic thinking.
≤

Often people want something that someone else has, but they
would not want to swap places with them.O Someone with a lot of
money is jealous of someone with a lot of free time. He or she then
forgets, for example, that the one with a lot of free time has much
less money to spend. Or vice versa. Or someone is jealous because
someone else is so popular. S/he forgets that being popular involves doing something, a particular way of interacting with people,
which does not suit everyone. The same is true for jealousy of artists,
good writers or good musicians. Most people who are very good at
something have put an awful lot of energy into it. To someone who
is jealous of someone else, ask the question: would you want to live
like that person? There is a good chance that you get the answer
‘no’.
≤

But suppose that someone was very successful in the ‘good things
of life’ without expending much effort. Such ‘lucky devils’ exist, at
least so it sometimes seems. Is jealousy then ‘appropriate’ for me?
Of course not; it is philosophically impossible to substantiate, and
I would just make myself unhappy. I would be better off realising
that I could probably learn from the ‘maestro’, and in any case I can
enjoy her or his performance.
≤

When mentioning jealousy, many people think of jealousy in love.
This type of jealousy is indeed very common. But jealousy has
nothing further to do with love. I have namely no ‘right’ to love,
certainly not to unconditional, clingy love. What could there be
against someone who loves me loving others too? What could there
be against me being deeply fond of several people at once? The more
love, the better, surely?
Only free love exists—because unfree love is not love. That means
138

that everyone has the possibility of loving all others and (therefore)
also falling in love with them. Jealousy is actually a ham-fisted
attempt to compel someone to love you while stopping them from
loving someone else. This mostly has the opposite effect to that
intended. Not only by feeling jealous, which is bad enough, but
also because the person you want love from is more likely to turn
their back on you.
≤

Jealousy has a lot to do with greediness and possessiveness, combined with ‘comparisonitis’.QP The motor of capitalism, the competitive instinct, arises out of jealousy, and would therefore disappear
if everyone was a Stoic. A Stoic economy is one in which all people
want the best for each other, and strive for it.
Being in love
In the preface to his reader De mens is een dier dat kan denken (The
human is an animal that can think), Piet Gerbrandy wrote that he is
surprised by Seneca, who stated that whoever is in love, ambitious
or sorrowful should be regarded as sick. Gerbrandy commented:
‘A greater contradiction with modern visions of humans is scarcely
conceivable. Can we really understand people from the Classical
period?’
Many centuries after Seneca, however, Spinoza wrote something
similar in his Ethics, namely that falling in love, miserliness and a
thirst for fame are similar aberrations to seeing strange objects in the
daytime. Types of sickness, in other words. Is Spinoza incomprehensible for modern people?QQ No! I understand these ideas, and not
just that, I find them very inspiring, and above all logical.
≤

Nature, according to the Stoics, is organised such that useful things
generate pleasure.QW But not everything that generates pleasure is
useful; short-term pleasure can have damaging consequences, and
pleasure is therefore not something to aim for as a goal.
What can be said about the phenomenon of being in love? It is a
139

feeling that most people experience as very positive. It is true that
less pleasant feelings such as embarrassment and fear of failure tend
to accompany it, but the feeling itself, being very enthusiastic about
someone so that you would rather do nothing more than be very
close to them, is one that many people experience as pleasant. So
pleasant, indeed, that people can remain in love for a long time even
if it is not reciprocated.
≤

Being in love in the sense of an attraction based on friendship
and love constituted a cohesive force in the ideal society in Zeno’s
Politeia. This apparently was a form of love where I feel happy without losing myself, and without having to ‘conquer’ or ‘possess’ the
object of my love. It is not at the cost of my independence.
But lovesickness, a stronger version of being in love, is clearly a feeling that runs away with me. This passion arises from a possessive
urge, from thoughts such as ‘I must be with X, and X must love
me and me alone, otherwise my world will collapse around me’.
It means I have set my heart on someone else and make my mood
totally dependent on what they do. Lovesickness is therefore a
source of yearning, frustration and unhappiness.
But luckily, even for being love it is true that feelings do not just
happen to you, they are the result of thoughts which, once you
are aware of them, you can actively shape and therefore change.
Change into a ‘manageable form of being in love’, or simply into
‘ordinary’ love.

being in love works like an addiction; people must kick the habit if
they want to get out of it.QE
≤

A passionate love can blind someone and is actually (just like all
strong affectations) nothing other than a fit of madness. Unlike a
fit of anger, a fit of passionate love mostly causes little harm, and
for outsiders this foolishness often forms an enjoyable topic of conversation. Yet sometimes passionate love can cause much damage.
Novels, plays and stories throughout the ages from all parts of the
world show that this happens everywhere and has done since time
immemorial.
However, it is not love that causes this misery, but the possessive
urge that wrongly gets attached to it.
Love
With love by itself in the sense of loving someone, nothing can go
wrong. Spinoza called envy, jealousy, ambition, miserliness and
greed passiones (passions). Lovesickness, the passionate version
of being in love, also belongs in this list. Love on the other hand
belongs to the actiones, the acts.
Love is an activity. This form of love cannot be restricted and also
can never be aroused under coercion. It is by definition free—’free
love’ is, as noted above, the only love that there is.
≤

Lovesickness distorts reality. It is not very likely that the picture that
you have, that one person is so much more special than the rest, is
correct. The same is true for the idea that only that one person is
really right for you. Once lovesickness is over, you can look again in
the calm light of day, and that ever-so-special person will change
back into an ordinary person.
It appears that many people simply enjoy being in love, for the
buzz, to have the feeling of really being alive. When in love, they
feel more energetic and lively than at other times; in this sense,

But this active form of love is almost never something we are
brought up on. Erich Fromm wrote in The Art of Loving that love is
experienced by most people as something that happens to them; a
sensation, something passive. People are generally occupied primarily with how they can make themselves attractive, often focussing
on success, money, fame, appearance, power. Indifferent matters.
‘There is hardly any activity, any enterprise, which is started out
with such tremendous hopes and expectations, and yet which fails
so regularly, as love’, according to Fromm. Loving as an activity is
however something that everyone can learn. The best ‘guarantee’ of

140

141

≤

getting love is to give it out without expecting anything in return
…

time being) only be an aspiration, but each step in that direction is
worthwhile.

≤

Grief

Michel de Montaigne (1533-1592), who was inspired both by
Stoicism and Scepticism, also argued in favour of an active concept of love, focussed on giving love instead of receiving it. He was
sceptical about marriage, using as an example the above-mentioned
Greek natural philosopher Thales, who first considered it too early
and later on too late to marry.
≤

People who spend a large portion of their lives together generally
lose their ‘rose-coloured spectacles’ and are sure to discover all kinds
of habits and characteristics of their partners that did not occur or
were not noticed when they first fell in love. In an attempt to make
their partner fit their idealized picture of them, they continually
express their annoyance and criticism. Miriam van Reijen considers
that it shows more love if you accept another person as s/he is instead
of trying to change her/him. ‘We want another person to change
so that we will be happy. We seek the source of happiness outside
ourselves; we think that the behaviour of someone else stands in the
way of our happiness.’ Acceptance makes both partners free, according to her: one is free of the other’s moaning, the other of annoyances and frustration (which she does not need to suppress, but can
prevent by thinking it over), so that she can focus her energy on her
own things. ‘Do not forget that you cannot change another person;
you can only change yourself.’
But the other person can also change himself/herself, and when it
comes to all the choices you make in daily life you can provide new
ideas to that other person. Whether these are taken up is not something you control.

Nor indeed will the wise man ever feel grief; seeing that grief is irrational
contraction of the soul.QR
The Early Stoics would never have cried. Except—undoubtedly—
when they were children. Although the true Stoic would never be in
a state of grief, grief is an affectation that causes little or no damage
to the griever’s surroundings. Someone who grieves does not protest, but cries or is silent. There can be many reasons for grief: an aim
is not reached, a wish is not fulfilled, a love is unrequited, a loved
one has died.
≤

Living without grief does not imply a lack of feelings. Just as love
and friendship are pleasant feelings which are included in the eupatheiai, thoughts about a friendship that is over or the death of a loved one
can also be pleasant feelings. Seneca wrote letters of condolence to
people who mourned the loss of a loved one. The atomist Epicurus
wrote a lot about the enjoyment of pleasant memories after the
death of friends.QT
Marcus Aurelius, the Roman, saw the death of loved ones only as
change—everything changes continually, life and death are part of
this universe.
≤

Ultimately, it is possible to love everyone. Think of Zeno’s ideal,
where all sages are friends with each other, and the concentric circles
of Hierocles. It is clear that such worldwide free love can (for the

Based on the idea that people are not perfect Stoics, I think it is
logical that we need time to investigate a new situation in which we
can only enjoy the memories of our loved ones. Stoic commentary
along the lines of: ‘surely you knew that this was a mortal being’ is
therefore something I experience not as an unanswerable remark,
but as a useful thought, which can guard me from sliding towards
endless grief or dejection.
Sometimes people remain stuck in their grief; then it becomes a fret-

142

143

≤

ful mood, caused by not wanting to face the new situation.
Grief is in that case a mood in which people think back nostalgically
to the past and therefore harbour the irrational wish that the present
ought to resemble the past in ways that are simply not possible.
That is, instead of using this ‘thought-energy’ to make the present
(and the future) more pleasant.
≤

Seneca’s answer was mostly along the lines of ‘moaning does not
help’: someone who complains, whines or sighs experiences the
same things as someone who bears events bravely. Dying ‘too
young’ is not possible, because it is possible to die at any age, and
grief for someone who is dead is not necessary: a loveless person
does not need to be missed in this way, and a loving person would
not want others to be mournful about her/him, so said Seneca. He
considered it inhuman (and rightly so) to remain indifferent when
a loved one has died. Anyway, it was not for nothing that he wrote
a lot about this; with all his sensible advice, he hoped to console
people who experience grief.QY
≤

Some forms of grief effectively amount to self-pity. The kind of
grief, that is, where I think I have been short-changed, as if I have
a ‘right’ to something, to a particular amount of love or attention,
or if I think that things should always go my way. The irrational
thoughts that this grief is based on can once more be refuted by
soberly facing the situation, even if a lot of ‘Stoic courage’ is often
needed for this.
Joy
Cheerfulness, an active disposition, in other words being willing to
do all manner of things, could be considered the ideal ‘basic mood’.
A quiet type of joy, such as the joviality of the atomist Democritus.
Even happiness perhaps, because you are busy doing good things. In
a perfect Stoic, this basic mood is constantly present.
144

≤

There are also other forms of joy. You can ‘be beside yourself’ with
pleasure, for example. Would those Stoics consider that wrong? As
far as I am concerned, there is nothing wrong with great fun. I suspect, however, that the Stoics preferred more serious moods—I bet
this was usually the case.
Humour
Did the Stoics have a sense of humour? In Lives of the Eminent
Philosophers by Diogenes Laërtius, there are many humorous stories
about Ancient Greek philosophers, particularly about the Cynics,
but also about Stoics. The atomist Democritus was, as noted above,
called ‘the laughing philosopher’. Did he laugh in a friendly way?
Mockingly? In self-mockery? Undoubtedly they laughed, including the Stoics—but their laughs, unlike their texts, were not recorded anywhere.
≤

Is humour a feeling? Joyfulness and cheerfulness are feelings and
moods. Humour is not a mood, but an activity involving reasoning
that makes you joyful. Humour requires suppleness of thought:
looking at things from a totally different angle, making crazy leaps
of logic. Logic was for Stoics a very important part of their philosophy, and I suspect that they had many jokes tinged with logic.
Did they not laugh at the ‘problems’ set by Chrysippus along the
lines of ‘you have not lost your horns, so you have them’?
≤

With a Stoic outlook on life, which your practical efforts fail to keep
up with, you can soon end up with self-mockery. Commonalities
between a Stoic attitude and self-mockery are common sense and
the desire to look at things from a distance. Particularly when I
make a big deal of something that would be totally unimportant
if ‘seen from the moon’, I can spontaneously burst out laughing.
Whether I want to or not, I immediately see the pettiness of my
concerns. And my laugh clears the air.
145

≤

Needless to say: the fact that laughing is healthy for emotional life
does not mean that reason does not enter into it. Only once you
realise the absurdity of particular concerns or lamentations do you
break out in laughter.
≤

There does, however, also exist much malicious ‘humour’. An awful
lot of jokes revolve around making particular individuals or groups
of people look ridiculous. By joining in with the laughter, you
‘confirm’ your own supposed superiority. In this so-called humour,
there lies hostility, aggression and therefore verbal violence. A Stoic
who is the ‘victim’ of this can of course cope with it, but would have
no need at all to take part in such a thing.
≤

Putting things into perspective and (genuine) humour do not belong
together with anger, indignation, pity and grief. Nor with fear: you
do not make jokes or laugh if you are extremely afraid. Via humour,
people can (at least for a moment) release themselves from their situation. Humour can (at the very least) free people from their strong,
nagging feelings.QU Irrational thoughts are always humourless. This
does not mean that, conversely, all humour exhibits wisdom …
Commiseration or engagement?
Would a Stoic, who is not personally suffering, be concerned about
the ups and downs of others? Martha Nussbaum has her doubts
about this. In her book Upheavals of Thought she devotes many
pages to the concept ‘compassion’.QI For her, the Stoics do not come
off well when it comes to this subject. But to my mind the answer
to this question depends on what you mean by compassion: is it
commiseration or engagement? Martha Nussbaum unfortunately
makes no distinction between these.

people on the other side of the world who are hungry, that arises
mainly because I know nothing I can do to solve the problem, yet I
nevertheless feel partly responsible for it. The situation clashes with
my ideas about justice; that is logical. But commiserating is not
a proper answer; no one benefits from it, and I feel unhappy too.
Commiserating goes no further than: ‘how horrible, this should not
happen, I ought really to do something about it’.
Commiserating immobilises things. I see that someone suffers and I
suffer too. Anger, grief and particularly guilt can play a role in commiseration, i.e. in the thoughts that generate these feelings.
≤

Behind commiseration lies the supposition that particular things
are important, things which according to Stoicism are indifferent
matters. It is therefore consistent to ‘abolish’ commiseration: if you
reckon that circumstances and material things have no authentic
value for you, you can see things that way for others too—even if the
others think differently.
But—although Martha Nussbaum’s commentary on the Stoics
seems to omit this—commiseration is just one particular form of
empathy. Nussbaum seems to think that the refusal to commiserate
with others’ suffering means that a Stoic is unfeeling. Yet it seems
quite possible to me to empathise in another way with other people
based on Stoic views. Where else could the virtue of justice come
from? Why else would the Stoics consider all people to be equal, and
why would friendship be seen as something of great importance?
≤

If I commiserate (i.e. if I literally join in with the misery) with

‘Getting rid’ of commiseration is not the end of the matter.
Compassion in the sense of engagement, after all, is quite compatible with Stoic ideas. A Stoic does not live on a desert island but takes
an active part in social life, and so acts out of engagement, both
with friends and acquaintances and with others. Think of the extension of the ‘own’ in the concentric circles of Hierocles (Chapter VI).
From engagement or solidarity, we should therefore try to help
others where necessary. Practical help based on engagement makes
a real difference, in contrast to (passive) commiseration.

146

147

≤

≤

Nussbaum, incidentally, does remark that the motivation for this
‘extreme’ standpoint of the Stoics on compassion, that is diametrically opposed to social views and opinions on the Left, by saying
that circumstances, including social circumstances, are indifferent,
‘is at root a strongly egalitarian and cosmopolitan one’.QO When it
comes to what life is ultimately about—good life—people are entirely equal. For a Stoic, competition is not possible: each person can
only obtain happiness through the challenges that her or his own
life offers.
Unfortunately, Martha Nussbaum does not trust in the same cosmopolitan motives being inextricably linked to an attitude of engagement with other people.

He also wrote that Stoics
…say that the wise man is passionless, because he is not prone to fall
into such infirmity. But they add that in another sense the term apathy
is applied to the bad man, when, that is, it means that he is callous and
relentless.WW
≤

On the question of how the Early Stoic philosophers reacted to
others’ bad luck, I have not been able to find much information.
According to Tad Brennan,WP Ancient Greek ethics included little
or nothing about the effects of individual behaviour on others; the
emphasis was clearly on the question of how each individual could
themselves achieve happiness (eudaimonia).

It is clear that if people can choose, they prefer to avoid certain
things while welcoming other things. This is part of human nature,
so choosing ‘preferable’ things is seen by Stoics as reasonable—as
long as it is realised that these things are not necessary for our happiness. This latter insight is too often lacking in the non-wise (more
or less all people), so that every now and then they feel unhappy.
How does a Stoic react to an unhappy person? Not by (passive)
commiseration, but by activity, by offering practical help, but also
(particularly if practical help is not possible) by suggesting Stoic
ideas.
If the Early Stoics were not (sufficiently) focused on compassion
(engagement) in their ethics, that is no reason for us to reject their
ethics and thereby miss its strong points as well. Extending it seems
to me to be a better solution.

≤

≤

The focus on one’s own happiness seems perhaps at first sight (in
modern terms) egocentric, or even egoistic. But this would only be
true if there were a conflict of interest between individuals, and it
seems to me that the Stoics certainly did not think in terms of conflicts of interest.
A Stoic may strive for his or her own happiness, but this comes precisely from the insight that real happiness can only be reached by
sensible behaviour, justice, focusing on friendship, common sense
and other attractive values. These are primarily social values.

For empathy too, a distinction can be made between an effective
form and an ineffective, compelling, ‘severe’ form. The ineffective
form is commiseration/pity. The suitable, effective form I have called engagement.
In order to understand others and really help, it is essential that I
myself am calm. Someone who has been seized by strong feelings
(for example by commiseration that is guilt-laden or tinged with
anger) is not alert to the signals given out by another. People who
practically help others, for example in emergencies, can benefit
from (Stoic) peace of mind and a sensible attitude.

≤

≤

Stoic sages should not live on their own, wrote Diogenes Laërtius;
society and activity are part of living according to nature.WQ
148

≤

Stoic ideas do indeed contain social values. Stoics would therefore
feel engaged in the development and welfare of other people—and
149

precisely because Stoics do not suffer from impeding feelings such as
anger, humiliation, guilt or passive commiseration, they are free to
think about how society can improve.

XII
PITFALLS FOR INEXPERT STOICS

Stiff upper lip
Sometimes difficult to distinguish from being Stoic, but boils down
to suppressing feelings; always has comebacks (in a fit of anger or a
heart condition).
Disinterestedness
Emptiness. Banishing all feelings, even pleasant ones such as joy,
love, engagement and interest, which do not lead to passivity or
foolish behaviour. There is nothing wrong with feeling (a consequence of thinking) as long as you do not let yourself be carried
away by feelings.
Indifference
Aiming for nothing. ‘It makes no difference after all, you can always
be happy.’ Devoting myself to everything that is good is, according
to the Stoics, the most important thing I can do.
Rationalising
Or rather (in order to avoid making the word ‘rational’ appear bad):
inventing excuses, smooth talking, explaining away feelings. None
of this is belongs to Stoicism!
150

151

Apolitical attitude
The Early Stoics were very politically engaged. It is known of Zeno
and Chrysippus that they both wrote a Politeia (‘Republic’). The
Roman Stoics were also socially engaged; that is quite clear. They
had a cosmopolitan attitude and saw all people as of equal standing,
which was quite exceptional in antiquity.
Guilt-thinking
By feeling unhappy about particular words or deeds I achieve
nothing, and the rest of the world does not benefit from it either. I
would be better off using my energy to change my ideas (and thereby also my feelings and my behaviour). Because that is possible—
that is the ‘Good News’. (See also Chapter XI)
Optimism
‘The world is beautiful, people are nice, everything turns out well.’
No, it doesn’t. A Stoic attitude does not mean that I think that
everything will turn out well or be better than expected. But it does
mean that I maintain the idea: whatever happens, I can make something pleasant/good out of it through thought and action.
Passivity
Being Stoic is an active attitude to life. Sensibly facing what happens is something different to letting everything happen to me and
putting my own will to sleep.
Putting up with things

situation and that of others, and doing so without anger, pessimism
or bitterness. Possibly together with the neighbour.
Stoicism as a brake
Never reacting enthusiastically to anything, never laughing enthusiastically, putting a brake on all you say: that too is a pitfall. There
is nothing wrong with laughing or enthusiasm, or other positive
expressions. And for something like anger it is not about avoiding
saying particular things in order to swallow my anger, it is about
really not thinking about those things. Not because being angry
is impolite (think of Zeno, the half-Cynic), but because the ideas
behind that behaviour are philosophically incorrect and because I
make myself unhappy that way.
Fake Stoicism
Actually, most adults act as if they are Stoic/sensible, while that is
totally not the case. And this fake Stoic attitude is precisely what
causes so many problems.
Seeing beyond the horizon of ‘me’, ‘here’ and ‘now’ is something
you have to learn. Many adults still react in particular situations
in the way they did when they were children, at least partly (and
for the clumsiest part at that). But they know that this is not sensible, or think that it is ‘not done’, and so they deeply repress their
strong, nagging feelings. Children are mostly a lot less complex
than adults, because they show their feelings more openly, bottling
them up less or not at all. Most adults like children because of this.
They have lost the knack of showing their own feelings. Most fall
between two stools: endearing childish attitudes and wise, sensible
attitudes.

Saying: ‘it is OK really, the neighbour is worse off than me’ is
merely resigning to ‘fate’ and has little to do with Stoicism. Leaning
on someone else’s (even worse) fate is, I think, in any case rather
questionable. I would consider it a genuine Stoic attitude if in this
situation I actively tried to make the best of it, trying to improve my
152

153

XIII
HAPPINESS

‘Any man who maintains that happiness comes wholly from within
should be compelled to spend thirty-six hours in rags, in a blizzard,
without food’.Q

do not think so. I think that different kinds of happiness are being
talked about here. ‘Happiness’ is actually a very vague term, because
‘happiness’ can have different depths, colours, gradations and
measures of intensity and sustainability. At least, that is the case in
daily usage.
The only happiness that counted for the Stoics was of course undisturbed, pure happiness. A ‘bad’ person, or more accurately an antisocial, egotistically behaving person would in any case not be able
to experience this (undisturbed) form of happiness. Amongst his/her
pleasant feelings there will at least be interference from feelings (or
thoughts) such as a gnawing conscience or fear of punishment, and
so the pleasant feelings can no longer be described as happiness in
the Stoic sense. The malefactor can at the most experience pleasure:
short-term pleasure. After that, there will be regret, fear, unease or
other discomfort.

≤

≤

According to the Stoics, and also according to Plato, a ‘bad’ person
can never be happy, however prosperous he/she is. Is a good person
always happy then? Results of scientific research in recent years do
indicate something along these lines. Altruistically-oriented people
appear to be happier and even live longer on average than others.
People get good feelings from helping others. By helping neighbours, by supporting refugees, but also by joining an environmental
activist group or not eating meat for idealistic reasons. Doing good
things makes you feel good.
Aristotle considered that being good was a necessary but not
sufficient condition for happiness: prosperity was necessary too.
However, as noted above, according to the Stoics circumstances
have no influence at all, and being good (arete/wisdom) is both a
necessary and sufficient condition for happiness.

From an internal perspective, all choices that an individual makes
are logical for that individual at that moment. Seen from an external perspective (or later by the individual himself/herself) a lot of
behaviour seems irrational (though explicable): not effective, not
in the individual’s or others’ interest. Irrational behaviour in the
end always boils down to choosing short-term enjoyment (or shortterm avoidance of suffering), instead of ‘sustainable happiness’.
≤

Stoic wisdom, and its resulting Stoic happiness, is an ideal that in
all probability will never be fully achieved, but which is not a priori
unfeasible; it is a personal utopia.
≤

Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) did not agree: he could quite easily
imagine someone who was bad and nevertheless happy. Conversely,
he could equally imagine someone who was good and nevertheless
unhappy. Does this refute the idea of the Stoics, Plato and others? I

This chapter is about happiness. What is happiness? There are of
course very many conceivable interpretations of that word, but
broadly speaking there are four: good luck, enjoyment, euphoria
and the Stoic eudaimonia, an active form of happiness, the only
real happiness, which (to avoid confusion) I call ‘sustainable happiness’.

154

155

≤

Good luck
Because the word ‘happiness’ has such a broad meaning, it is sometimes difficult to work out what is meant by it. In Dutch, its meaning is broader still, as the Dutch word geluk can mean either ‘happiness’ or ‘good luck’, and its opposite ongeluk can mean ‘unhappiness’ or ‘bad luck’, or indeed ‘accident’. Gidia Jacobs states, for
example: ‘Geluk (happiness or good luck) and ongeluk (unhappiness
or bad luck) are not shared ‘fairly’ between people who do good or
bad things.’W Here I would not use the words geluk and ongeluk,
and certainly not without explanation. It is not happiness that is
unequally ‘shared’ between people, but luck or good fortune. The
words ‘luck’ and ‘fortune’ encapsulate the capriciousness of the
reality outside us.
Good and bad luck are not only unequally shared; the ‘sharing’ has
no connection at all to people’s good or bad deeds. Realising this
saves a lot of worry.
≤

‘Being fortunate’ in the sense of ‘having good luck’ is directly linked
to external circumstances. You could win a lottery, the weather is
good, you meet a particularly nice person; from a Stoic perspective
all of that is (merely) a welcome bonus. Having good luck is, as everyone knows, something quite different from being happy.
Enjoyment

way, because there are many types of immediate enjoyment which
cause pain later on. Taking account of the effects in the long term
means that there is less suffering and therefore more enjoyment—a
neutral position, after all, did not exist according to Epicurus. For
the Stoics, enjoyment is one of the ‘indifferent matters’; it can be
excellent if linked to ‘a correct intention’, but enjoyment can also
turn out badly. So enjoyment can take you in different directions,
and for Stoics it is something quite different from real happiness
(eudaimonia).
Euphoria
What is sometimes meant by the word ‘happiness’ is a situation of
delirious joy: euphoria. In this case the ‘happiness’ is itself a strong,
compelling feeling, which according to the Stoics needs to be
avoided. Do people aim to feel euphoric, overjoyed, elated or very
cheerful all the time? I do not think so. I myself am in any case glad
that I am not madly happy all the time! It is, you see, quite tiring—
not least of all for those in the immediate vicinity, who often use
another expression for it: worked up. Someone in this mood does
not consider things sensibly, philosophising is right out, and just as
with all strong feelings, euphoria is accompanied by a unidirectional focus on oneself, which in the end does not feel good. Looking
around with a broader outlook and being open to the rest of the
world gives more satisfaction in the long term.
Eudaimonia

Then there is happiness in the sense of enjoyment/enjoying. You
feel fine, you are enjoying nature, being with others or being alone,
enjoying food or drink, a gripping book, good music, art, or the fond
touches of a loved one. The Ancient Greeks called this sort of happiness hedone, sometimes translated as lust, other times as pleasure
or enjoyment. Another distinction can be made between immediate
enjoyment (particularly physical pleasure) and postponement of
direct pleasure in order to aim for longer-term pleasure. As noted
above, Epicurus argued that this longer term needs to be considered. For him it was mostly about avoiding pain/discomfort: a safer

Finally, there is the happiness that the Greek philosophers called
eudaimonia, the happiness that according to the Stoics coincides
with ‘the good’ in the ethical sense. ‘The good life’ here does not
mean ‘living it up’, but ‘making something good of life’. You create
a ‘good mood’ from your own activity or thoughts, and if you think
and act from true Stoic insight, your happiness cannot be destroyed.
As noted earlier, Zeno called this way of living euroia biou, a good,
onward-flowing life.

156

157

‘Good’ living here clearly means behaving such that not only your
own interest counts, but also the interest of others or the public
interest (justice), which also includes taking account of the long
term (wisdom, self-control). It is logical that behaving this way
involves more consideration than with egocentric short-term acts.
It is also logical that it requires a more active attitude (‘courage’), in
which reason is used a great deal.

sometimes much more—than not bothering. ‘Good’ means choosing the best solutions, including for the long term, which involves
looking further than direct self-interest, so that a choice ‘has to’ be
made for the best solution for myself and others. This solution is not
ready for the taking. Common sense and self-control, ideas about
justice, etc. all play a part in it.U The short-term option is (literally)
ready for the taking for whoever is looking for immediate enjoyment, euphoria or other non-Stoic types of happiness.

≤

≤

This sort of goodness is one of the innate options for life; it is not an
elevated kind of ‘Good’. It is, you could say, a possibility inherent in
matter.E According to the Stoics, what is good corresponds to nature.
While they (like almost everyone at that time) thought that moral
behaviour was only possible for humans, because only humans
could think logically, we can now read in the books of ethologists
such as Frans de Waal how morals play a role for anthropoid apes
and other social animals,R something of which the anarchist Peter
Kropotkin (1842-1921) had already given several examples in his
book Mutual Aid. These findings indicate that morals do not stand
above nature, as many think, but are part of it and logically arise
from it.T

Yet, if you interpret goodness as ‘that which promotes sustainable
happiness’, you would say that it is simply logical that ‘goodness’
is stronger than ‘badness’. In the book Eén en één is zelden twee (One
and one is rarely two), Weia Reinboud describes her ‘law of unpredictable progress.’ This comprises (in my words): 1. people think,
therefore they sometimes think of something new; 2. amongst the
new ideas, from time to time there will be ones that can lead to
improvement; 3. once more people realise that these ideas get rid
of particular disadvantages, the new ideas will be taken up by these
people. Therefore, as soon as particular knowledge becomes relatively common, the world will rise above some (disadvantageous)
ideas and their accompanying disadvantageous phenomena, and
these will be replaced by more suitable ideas and phenomena.I

≤

≤

Kropotkin thought, just like Godwin (1756-1836), that nothing
generates so much happiness as a friendly and helpful attitude
towards other people.Y ‘Nothing feels as good as doing good’ is
therefore an important theme for those who want to improve the
world. This thought stands in opposition to the widely-spread idea
of Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) that ‘doing your duty’ is just always
unpleasant.

≤

None of this implies that ‘progress’ is effortless. For example, some
people keep thinking up new ways to enrich themselves at the cost
of others, etc. Saying that ‘good’ is stronger does not mean that an
individual, a society or even humanity as a whole cannot perish as a
result of bad (disadvantageous) developments.
≤

There is of course a quandary. If doing good makes you happy, why
do most people not make full use of this possibility? That is because
not doing good, i.e. behaving egocentrically and short-sightedly, is
equally a possibility for living beings. Doing good is more trouble—

I think, incidentally, that Stoic happiness is just as difficult to
achieve if you are in a (materially) favourable situation as if you are
in a (materially) miserable situation. In both cases, it is difficult not
to let yourself be distracted by your situation. In the favourable situation there is a great temptation to satisfy yourself with short-term

158

159

≤

enjoyment and a pleasurable mood (with all the disadvantages connected to it in the long term). In the miserable situation it is difficult
not to let yourself be carried away by unpleasant feelings and allow
a dejected mood to depress you.
≤

If I want to achieve my Stoic aims more often, I will need to practise. Doing something without practice rarely succeeds—I have
tried it often enough.
Well, this is the great stumbling block: virtually no one is brought
up on Stoicism. Moreover, trying to become Stoic is never-ending;
you must make this way of thought your own, and maintain it, just
like maintaining your physical condition or learning a new language.
≤

Stoicism can mean a great deal to individuals: getting rid of unpleasant feelings and increasing control over your own thinking and
feeling. Just imagine what it would be like if the vast majority of
people thought and acted more or less Stoically. What would that
mean for society and on a larger scale for the world?

XIV
THE STOIC AS WORLD CITIZEN

Previous chapters were mostly about the options for individuals
to become more sensible, calmer and wiser through a number of
insights from particularly the Early Stoa. But how did the Stoics
actually regard society? Chapter VI dealt with cosmopolitanism,
justice and equality as Stoic values which are important for society.
This chapter contains some additions to this and an attempt to work
out which social structures best suit Stoicism.
≤

Stoics did not consider themselves above politics. Indeed, they
often took an active part in it. What sort of society did the Stoics
strive for? A world of city-states, like ancient Athens? A worldwide
empire? A democracy? Or a leaderless, ‘anarchist’ world community
of the wise?
≤

Although Zeno’s ‘city of the wise’ was most reminiscent of a leaderless group of friends, based on equality and unanimity, it must be
said that in ancient times, Stoicism was often considered appealing
by kings and other rulers. This is particularly remarkable once you
realise that Early Stoic philosophers paid no attention to convention or bourgeois politeness.
≤

Alexander the Great, for example, had much admiration for
160

161

Diogenes the Cynic who, as I wrote earlier, can in one sense be
called a forerunner of the Early Stoics. According to a well-known
story, Alexander once visited Diogenes when he was sitting happily
in the sun, perhaps next to his barrel. When Alexander said that he
would give the philosopher whatever he wanted, the Cynic’s answer
was simple: ‘Stand out of my light’. Another time, Alexander asked
Diogenes: ‘Are you not afraid of me?’ Diogenes answered: ‘Why,
what are you, a good thing or a bad?’ Alexander of course said: ‘A
good thing’, after which Diogenes asked him: ‘Who, then, is afraid
of the good?’ According to some sources Alexander once said: ‘Had
I not been Alexander, I should have liked to be Diogenes.’Q
And Antigonus, the king whose rule Zeno came under, came as
often as he could to hear the arguments of Zeno. Zeno too once
heard that he could ask the king for whatever he wanted, and Zeno,
like Diogenes, wanted nothing from him—after which he was even
more appreciated by the king.

Why did a greedy, glory-seeking conqueror like Alexander appreciate a philosopher who was satisfied with just a barrel, a piece of
bread and his own wisdom? And what did a ruler like Antigonus
seek in the Stoics? Did he really do his best to be a ‘Stoic king’, i.e.
a wise and just king? In the case of the later philosopher-emperor
Marcus Aurelius it is clear: whatever else we think of him, he did
his best.

≤

≤

‘In a world of sages there would be no kings and no laws’, argued
Zeno, yet for Antigonus that was apparently not a threatening
position. A world full of sages was, after all, a long way off. Stoic
teaching was not really subversive. Zeno did not, after all, say that
non-sages did not need a king or a leader. The Stoics had many
supporters, but these did not constitute a majority in society, and
moreover none of them called themselves sages. Little, then, to fear
from this philosophy for a king.

According to Chrysippus and the other early Stoics, the best form of
government is a mixture of democracy, monarchy and aristocracy.
Though it is worth pointing out that according to these Stoics,
only a sage would be eligible to be a king, and belonging to the
aristocracy came not through birth, but ‘only’ by being good and
wise.E Actually, the Stoics were thinking here along the same lines
as Plato had earlier done with his ideas and experiments about the
philosopher as king. I, however, think that the Stoics were more
realistic about it, more pragmatic, because they knew only too well
that far-reaching wisdom was thinly sowed.

≤

Would Antigonus also have wanted to go and listen if Zeno and his
companions made revolutionary arguments for a leaderless city or
state? I would think so. But in that case he would probably have
first sent a spy and then his army.

as court philosophers.
The modes of getting a livelihood are also ludicrous, as e.g. maintenance
by a king; for he will have to be humoured.W
Some other Stoics, such as Zeno’s pupils Persaeus and Philonides
did, however, take this step. And of course, much later, Seneca.
≤

≤

Still, Zeno was no flatterer. However much Antigonus wanted, the
philosopher preferred to remain independent and did not enter the
king’s service. Cleanthes and Chrysippus also did not serve the king

All power in one person leads to a major risk: if that person is not
wise, a lot will go wrong, people will be repressed and exploited, etc.
And if that one person was a perfect sage, would that not mean that
s/he would refuse to rule over others?
And what should we make of an aristocracy on the basis of insight
and wisdom? Nowadays that would probably be called a ‘thinktank’. But a think-tank that can rule over others? Not ideal. And

162

163

≤

democracy? Does the majority by definition make sensible decisions? Certainly not always. But if it was a philosophically and politically educated majority? If they were Stoics?
≤

Democracies come in all shapes and sizes, from a dictatorship of
the majority to all kinds of grassroots democracies. In a democracy
based on consensus, people work with each other to seek out the
best solutions for everyone. There are always possibilities to accommodate people with different wishes—as long as these are not
repressive for others.
≤

On a small scale (shared houses, families, groups of friends, meetings, environmental action camps) grassroots democratic forms of
consultation and co-operation are used extensively. No one would
say that it is easy to decide everything together, but if it works, the
result is better than whatever result hierarchical structures may
produce, because it is supported by everyone. In this way of living
and co-operating, the group does not dominate over individuals;
neither does an individual or a small group of people hold sway over
the entire group.
Zeno thought up something similar for all sages, worldwide. But
with a collection of wise individuals, starting an ideal society is of
course a very easy task. Certainly in theory … In a real shared house
or commune, village, city or world, with real-existing, far-fromperfectly-wise individuals, leaderlessness is a question of trial and
error—even for people of good will.
≤

Political effort was encouraged by the Stoics; concerning yourself
with your surroundings and humanity as a whole was seen as suitable, kathekon. Because humans are social animals, this effort was
seen as being in agreement with nature. Through the commitment
of Stoics, with their ideas about equality and justice, good developments in society should be encouraged and bad ones prevented.
164

≤

A possible ‘political’ criticism of Stoicism is that a dictator or an authoritarian state would be quite happy with Stoic subjects. Subjects
who say that all manner of things are ‘indifferent’: freedom or
imprisonment, poverty or wealth, sickness or health. Subjects who
do not strive for (competing) positions of power because social positions are also ‘indifferent’.
Kings, emperors and other rulers are undoubtedly interested in
subjects who do not protest against poverty, etc.—but the question
is whether Stoics are the right people to expect this from. It is true
that wealth or poverty is indifferent for a Stoic; money is unimportant; a poor person can live a full life and even sick people can give
meaning to their lives. A ‘true’ Stoic would however never consider
herself/himself as a ‘subject’, and would therefore never behave as
one. S/he would conduct herself/himself as totally equal to a king,
a baker or anyone else.
≤

The story mentioned above about Diogenes the Cynic, who did not
want to sit in the shadow of the king, is not simply a story about
frugality. It is mainly about equality: not putting someone else in
the shade and ensuring that no one else puts you in the shade. A
Stoic would not stand by and watch when injustices or other damaging events occur; whether these events arise from the acts of a king
or of other people is of no importance whatsoever.
≤

Another criticism of possible political attitudes of Stoics, as described earlier, is the supposition that a Stoic would not make a big deal
of experiencing circumstances such as poverty and would therefore
also not be concerned about others’ poverty.
It is true that if poverty affects me, it would be good for me to realise
that even a poor person (with an active Stoic attitude to life) can be
happy. If it concerns others’ poverty, then it is equally true for them
that they can be happy despite their poverty.
That does not detract from the fact that as a Stoic I would feel concerned about other people. Striving for ‘justice’ is on its own enough
165

to prevent me from wilfully disadvantaging others so that I would
become (in part) the cause of poverty. Stoicism, you could say, has
different messages for victims and culprits. If others are disadvantaged by my greed or unjust distribution of resources, that is very
much of concern to me.

XV
THE NON-STOIC SOCIETY

‘To change the world, you must start with yourself’? Good idea,
but what if we are so involved in ourselves that we forget the rest of
the world? That is not possible—at least, not according to the Stoic
approach.
≤

We live in a society that is anything but Stoic. A just society in the
sense of equal opportunities for self-development, equal distribution of money, land and goods is a long way off. Everyone appears
to be equal before the law, but in the small print this often turns out
not to be the case. There are a lot of hierarchical relationships, there
is much unfairness, discrimination has not been eliminated from
the world and the ‘moral’ of the law of the jungle is far from disappearing; indeed, the economy itself runs entirely on it.
≤

What counts for individuals also counts for society. A society is,
after all, nothing other than a collection of individuals who live in
a certain way with and next to each other. Just as strong feelings in
individuals were compared by Stoics to cold or diarrhoea, you could
regard collective strong or compelling feelings (such as sexism or
xenophobia) as illnesses. Contagious illnesses perhaps, but illnesses
for which healing is possible. Much human misery, and certainly
politically-based, large-scale misery, is caused by thoughts that are
not up to the task and the feelings that go with them.
166

167

≤

The ‘democratic consumerism’ which is part and parcel of modern
capitalism could also be seen as such a sickness. High consumption
is more or less impossible to reconcile with a Stoic attitude to life,
just like being set on earning lots of money. This sort of behaviour,
which is aimed at short-term pleasure and enjoyment, makes a
large proportion of people take part in perpetrating injustice without consciously choosing to do so, through unfair distribution of
food, environmental damage and disappearance of the countryside.
Developments which the perpetrators ultimately also become victims of.
≤

Although nature has ‘organised’ matters such that useful things
go together with pleasure, pleasure is a bad counsellor according to
the Stoics. People have the ability to think of all manner of things,
but as long as ‘enjoyment’ is the motive, powers of thought will be
applied to increasing all forms of pleasure. Often egoistical, shortlived pleasure that causes much damage. By focusing on long-term
enjoyment à la Epicurus we progress a lot further, but even with this
our vision remains somewhat limited.
≤

With hedonism in the bad sense of the word, haphazardly seeking
out more and ‘stronger’ forms of pleasure, people become simply consumers of life, ‘slaves of their passions’ as Stoics say. Their
motives lack not only the Stoic quality of justice; courage, frugality
and self-control are also hard to find. If we therefore use the Stoic
qualities or ‘virtues’ as a criterion for the ‘wisdom’ of today’s (democratic, capitalist) society, it does not come out well: there is much
injustice, extravagance, conformism and lack of insight.Q

idea that you have been short-changed, and that it is necessary for
others to hold you in great esteem), feelings of jealousy (the idea
that it is wrong if someone else has something that you would also
like to have), humiliation (the idea that others did not treat you in
line with what you are worth, and that this actually decreases what
you are worth), anger (the idea that great injustice has been done
to you, and you can set it right by ranting and raving), revenge (the
idea that you were badly offended, hurt or disadvantaged by others
and that it helps to do something similar or possibly even worse to
others), and so on.
≤

As well as this, there are collective strong, nagging feelings, feelings
(i.e. judgments) which many people allow certain politicians to
whip up, such as fears and collective senses of inferiority. Populists
play on the urges of many people to belong, and on the fear of
‘the other’. This gives rise to ideologies based on collective strong
feelings: nationalism, the belief that humanity can be divided into
different nations, each with their ‘national character’, or the belief
that humanity can be divided into races with various characteristics,
into classes, sexes, winners and losers, attractive and unattractive,
and so on. According to this way of thought, in each case one group
is better and more important than the other, there is an aversion to
the foreign, the Other, and an aversion to (specific!) changes.
In short, not just anger and other strong individual feelings, but
also passions like nationalism and collective hate of ‘foreigners’
arise from incorrect, unnecessary ideas. Ideas which can be refuted
and therefore changed. Even if that is often a tough cookie.
≤

Wars and other misery arise time and again from passion-arousing
judgments (from rulers or powerful groups) on the state of the
world: greed (the idea that possessions are important and that you
need to own as much or more than others), slight of honour (the

Nationalism, hatred or fear of foreigners and also collective greed,
competition and consumerism are passions which are particularly
found in right-wing political movements. Fear plays a key role in
religions, and particularly in the fundamentalist versions of them.
There too, feelings of ‘Us’ (that exclude ‘Them’) can raise their ugly
heads and get out of hand. But what about left-wing passions?
Here, you might say, at least ‘the heart is in the right place’. That

168

169

≤

means: there are indeed ‘strong feelings’ in left-wing circles that can
gain collective momentum. But an important difference is that the
drive here is not self-interest but public interest—and that makes a
big difference.
All the same, the tone of pamphlets is often anything but levelheaded, and methods used by activists quite often harbour anger
and aggressiveness. Unnecessary, and even damaging, in any case
for the activists themselves, because strong emotions can in the
course of time cause burn-out. But also damaging for the ‘good
cause’, because outsiders see mainly the fierceness of the demonstrators or activists and the media unfortunately focuses mostly on this
fierceness, and much less on conveying the arguments.
≤

Criticism of injustice, warning of damaging developments: it is
good to publicise these things, but then in a well-considered, peaceful manner. It would be of great utopian value if the energy which
do-gooders expend by winding themselves up could be diverted into
constructive action.
≤

Analysing societal problems is often carried out in terms of victims,
culprits and guiltiness instead of speaking in a level-headed manner
about causes and solutions to the problems.
States, powerful institutions or businesses tend to be quickly seen as
culprits, and ‘ordinary people’ as victims. The active contribution of
‘ordinary people’, of ourselves, is often overlooked or glossed over,
for example in the case of environmental problems.
≤

Just as ‘feeling guilty’ is based on the incorrect thought that you
could have done something differently, the same applies to accusing
others. It has no basis and also no use. If thinking in terms of guilt is
abandoned, the analyses would be clearer, people would no longer
feel under attack and they would be open to new ideas instead of
being entrenched in old ones.
170

≤

People live in enormously differing situations. There is no fair distribution of good and bad luck. It is to be expected that there are
people walking around with more than an ‘average quantity of bad
luck’’ Fair distribution (or justice) is obviously not built into natural
phenomena, but up until now this is also hard to find in human
institutions (businesses, governments). The most effective thing is
soberly to face reality. It may sound crazy, but it sometimes helps to
see humanity as a big machine or computer in which lots of components do not work properly. In order to repair it, you start by assuming there are causes for the machine’s failures, causes which can
be tracked down with the right knowledge and insight. Becoming
angry or indignant makes no sense and is pointless; in the case of a
machine, that is obvious. In the case of rulers or political systems,
it is equally ‘incorrect’, and moreover often damaging: for someone
else, but also for myself.
≤

Just as this applies in personal life, it also applies for improving
the world: we arrive at clearer analyses and can therefore act more
effectively if we do not allow ourselves to be carried away by strong
feelings. An attitude of friendship/solidarity and commitment to
others (people, animals, nature) is sufficient.
≤

Fair distribution can only be put forward by individuals, and can
only be put into practice by individuals co-operating with one
another. Via this route, qualities such as justiceW and equality can
be built into social structures. But even then it remains the case that
the system stands or falls on the motivations of the individuals who
carry these structures.
And, obviously, a tornado takes no notice of them.
≤

Ideas from Stoicism can offer great support to idealists who want
to improve the world, by not letting themselves be carried along by
feelings such as anger and indignation about wrongs, or by disap171

pointment in a society where few seem to be prepared to change
course and live really differently.
If the motivations are not strong feelings and high expectations
but wishes and well-thought-out ideas and arguments, then great
dejection—a well-known symptom for idealists—can be avoided.
And if this great dejection is avoided, more people will keep working for a better world.
≤

A politically active Stoic could therefore, as well as striving for virtues such as justice, work on refuting prejudices and spreading good
information, so that people can act on the basis of knowledge and
insight.
≤

It would of course be great if a number of Stoic ideas suddenly spread
worldwide, but for idealists it seems to me useful to realise that they
(just like everyone else) have very little under their personal control.
Stoicism can help with facing the world as it is. Via the Stoics we can
also learn to understand how feeling and thinking works for ourselves and other people—we can learn how we can change ourselves in
this area and how we can deal with other people better.
≤

As an aside, is it more difficult to be sensible and ‘good’ if you are
in a disadvantageous situation? That sometimes seems to be the
case. Someone who lives in poverty is more likely to steal bread than
someone who is rich. But … in a poor person’s situation, stealing
bread is not evil. It is maybe not so decent, it would have been nicer
to ask for it, but stealing bread if you are hungry and have no money
to buy anything is a question of survival. The ‘evil’ (the damaging
thing) lies more in the fact that this situation exists. It is the same
with smuggling, stealing, etc. If you include the situation plus the
intention, where one person steals to stay alive or to provide for
children, while the other steals (or is corrupt) in order to get even
richer, then I think that you cannot say that poverty and hunger
lead people astray.
172

≤

You also hear the opposite. It is often said that power and wealth
corrupt. Although this is often the case, that too is not necessarily
so. Every person has possibilities for exploiting or repressing ‘weaker’ people, and the more ‘power’ someone has, the greater the possibilities for this. Both ways of thinking (‘a bad situation provokes
criminal behaviour’ and ‘a beneficial situation provokes corrupt
behaviour’) merely express that in every situation there are different
sorts of temptations for people. Some yield to them, others do not.
≤

A philosopher-king as a Stoic sage remains a theoretical possibility,
just as a Stoic government does—but if we are going to focus on
exceptional situations, why not chose the best and most pleasant
of all: nobody as king, nobody as subject, everyone wise or at least
actively striving for wisdom?
≤

For Zeno’s sages it was the case that they addressed themselves to
the power of individuals. Most modern idealists, by contrast, concentrate on raising the matter of repressive social structures. They
feel commitment to the victims of these structures, and give these
people support. Solidarity.
Through a combination of both ‘strategies’, these approaches can
strengthen each other. Changing undesirable social structures will
not be successful and a ‘formal’ change will have no positive effect
as long as the individuals do not ‘carry’ the new, ‘better’ structures,
in other words, as long as they do not become a bit wiser and actively develop this wisdom, passing it on to their children and so on.
Social systems, however bad they are, cannot prevent individuals
from thinking things over, practicing and teaching themselves wisdom.
≤

A world in which people compete with each other, are jealous, are
quick-tempered, impulsively curse and fly off the handle is obviously not an ideal world and can never lead to an ideal society. For an
173

ideal world, as well as dismantling the old structures and building
new ones, it is therefore necessary for people to strive to see each
other as genuinely equal, and that they strive not to allow strong
feelings to carry them away.
≤

Many ideas from Stoicism are naturally compatible with striving for
non-violence, in the physical sense. But also in verbal interactions
Stoic ideas are important for a better, non-violent society. A Stoic
would not curse or insult people, and if criticised, insulted or even
cursed s/he would not become angry or indignant. A Stoic is open to
criticism and s/he would not see this as an attack but as an opportunity to learn something.
≤

Also on the phenomenon of indignation: idealists often say that they
act out of feelings of anger and indignation. The above-mentioned
philosopher David Hume stated correctly that from what there ‘is’
you can never deduce what there ‘should be’. Indignation is found
in the area of ‘should be’ and not of ‘how the situation actually is’.
(‘It is a scandal that twenty percent of people consume eighty percent of the available food; this must change, and quickly.’) Stoicism
implies that you face what ‘is’. (‘The situation is such that twenty
percent of people consume eighty percent of the available food.’)
‘Should be’ can be translated into wishes, but not into demands.
The wishes can immediately be converted into activity. (‘I will not
take part in overconsumption, and I will labour for a world in which
food is fairly distributed.’) A Stoic needs no anger or indignation to
get into action, the wish to labour for a pleasant world is enough.
≤

tanism and taking account of the long term.
≤

The concept of ‘power’, much used in politics, is on further examination rather vague. Do others have power over me? Do I have
power over others? What do I mean if I say that someone has power
over me, if that is not something physical? And for the physical
form of power, would it not be better to use the words ‘coercion’ or
‘violence’?
≤

The Stoic Étienne de la Boétie (1530-1563) wrote when he was about
eighteen an argument about ‘voluntary slavery’.E In this he expressed surprise that rulers keep succeeding in ruling over and repressing
‘the people’. This arises not because such a ‘tyrant’ is strong (often
he is not), and certainly not because such a ruler is good for people.
So, he writes:
Resolve to serve no more, and you are at once freed. I do not ask that
you place hands upon the tyrant to topple him over, but simply that you
support him no longer; then you will behold him, like a great Colossus
whose pedestal has been pulled away, fall of his own weight and break
in pieces.R
≤

There are (unfortunately) people who want power, who want to
rule. But La Boétie wondered how it came about that these imperious types often get their way. How can one person boss around
hundreds or thousands of other people, who could easily drive him
away when it comes to muscle-power?

If I say that a just society on the basis of equality seems best to me,
and therefore worth striving for, then I do not imply that such a
society ‘must happen’ or ‘is compulsory’ or ‘is proper’. Without
coming into the area of ‘should be’ or ‘ought’, i.e. without moral
indignation, I can realise that the egocentricity and short-term
interest that such a society thwarts are less rational than cosmopoli-

It is therefore the inhabitants themselves who permit, or, rather, bring
about, their own subjection, since by ceasing to submit they would put
an end to their servitude. A people enslaves itself, cuts its own throat,
when, having a choice between being vassals and being free men, it
deserts its liberties and takes on the yoke, gives consent to its own

174

175

≤

misery, or, rather, apparently welcomes it.T
This happens, according to Étienne de la Boétie, despite it being
clear that ‘all beings, because they feel, suffer misery in subjection
and long for liberty.’ Diogenes and Zeno would have endorsed this.
‘Stand out of my light!’
≤

The only reason that La Boétie can come up with for most people’s
running around after so-called lords and masters is the power of
custom:
Nevertheless it is clear enough that the powerful influence of custom
is in no respect more compelling than in this, namely, habituation to
subjection. It is said that Mithridates trained himself to drink poison.
Like him we learn to swallow, and not to find bitter, the venom of
servitude.Y
≤

The ideas of La Boétie fit with the ideas of the Early Stoics and
agree with the ideas of many anarchists of today. An insight that
is important both in Stoicism and in the essay of La Boétie is that
another person can have no power over my thoughts, in other words
cannot force me to think things that I do not want to think.U As for
power over what I do, here too more is possible than one might at
first think.
≤

When would we arrive at a better world: if everyone became a Stoic
or if everyone became inspired by Epicurus? Can an idealist also be
inspired by Epicurus?
According to Luciano de Crescenzo, humanity can be divided into
Stoics and Epicureans, and therefore idealists could also be divided into these two groups. The Stoics of today can, according to
Crescenzo, be easily recognised: they always have high ideals, preferably as unachievable as possible.
176

(A Stoic) would above all want to solve the problem of Hunger in the
World, for the whole world. If a more limited programme was suggested to him, for example hunger in the San Carlo all’Arena district
of Naples, he would immediately reject that, if only because it might
succeed.I
The Epicurean is a different kettle of fish, according to Crescenzo:
‘because he is conscious of the transience of life, he sets himself
small goals that can be achieved within a short period.’
≤

Imagine all idealists went to love in ‘Gardens of Epicurus’. There
would be men, women, people from all backgrounds; everyone
would take part in philosophy. Everyone in such a garden would
be friends with each other. The food and drink would be simple but
delicious. There would be laughter. People would enjoy each other’s
company. They would live in seclusion. Epicurus would be quoted
and honoured. Around the beautiful garden is a wall. What happens outside that wall is not important. Those in the garden do not
concern themselves with the rest of the world.
≤

Stoics indeed seem more ambitious, as Crescenzo wrote. They do not
turn their backs on the world but are in the middle of it, and want
to make their contribution to the whole. They are cosmopolitans,
wanting no walls, no borders. Perhaps they are more independent
and do not need a protecting wall. They also have no leader. Zeno,
Chrysippus, Epictetus, Seneca; a lot of Stoics have made their own
impressions on this philosophical movement.
All the same, a Stoic and an ‘Epicurean’ could be good and inspiring
friends of each other; I can see enough agreements between the two
schools of thought for this. Even if only because friendship and love
play a major role in both.
≤

Certainly, given the situation in the world, it seems to me not to be
‘suitable’ for the long term to go and live with friends in a garden
177

and not get involved in the world beyond this. There is a fair chance
anyway that the garden would be compulsorily purchased to build
yet another new motorway. To create a more pleasant world in the
long term, it is necessary to focus attention on the external situation, interact with people who think differently and take action.
Problems such as hunger, infectious diseases, war and climate change form enormous challenges for people who want to contribute
to a better world. Stoicism in particular offers, to my mind, a lot of
tools to help with this.

perfect form, would still try to improve the world, and s/he would
feel good—happy even—doing this.

≤

An ideal society consists of (enough) individuals who actively strive
for its ideals. In the case of Zeno’s Politeia (as with most utopias)
there is no more than a book. A book that unfortunately has since
been lost.
For Stoics after Zeno, it is the case that their ideals gradually sounded less socially subversive. The accent shifted from the idea of the
city of sages to practical advice for ‘ordinary’ citizens, particularly in
order to cope better with setbacks in daily life.
The part of Stoicism directed at individuals could fit in easily, for
example in Roman thought. The political aspect less so—differently, at least. All people equal? Indeed. But some were surely more
equal than others. Cosmopolitanism? Good idea: the whole world
under Roman rule!
≤

The fact that the first Stoic was also the most ‘anarchist’ is partly
explained by him being a pupil of Crates the Cynic. But apparently
it was these ideas that were less welcome and were later glossed over.
Zeno’s Politeia had, all in all, little political effect. The time was not
yet ripe for it, we might say. And now? What will we do? We have
once again plenty of opportunities to supplement and improve the
old theories, and to try to apply them in our lives.
≤

While a ‘true Stoic’ does not suffer in bad circumstances, such as the
presence of rulers or oppressive systems, the same Stoic, even in a less
178

179

≤

XVI
UTOPIA

Utopia is for a society what happiness is for an individual.
≤

There is a clear analogy between the Politeia of Zeno, the ‘city of the
wise’, city of friendship, peace and freedom, and anarchists’ ideal of
a free society. It is not for nothing that Peter Marshall in his book
about anarchism, Demanding the Impossible, devoted a chapter to the
Ancient Greeks, of which the largest part was about Zeno.
Zeno’s sages need no government nor manmade laws. For Stoics,
nature, and insight into it, reason in other words, form the ‘law’,
the guidelines. Customs and traditions were not important for the
Stoics, neither were countries, skin colour, gender, origin, wealth,
fame and so on. Stoics see the whole world as their home and all
people as their equals. Wise people by themselves form an ideal
society: a society without sovereigns and without subjects, without
rulers, without bosses and without controllers.
Without ruling—in Ancient Greek that is anarkhein. In modern
English: an anarchist society.Q
≤

Just as the ideals of the Stoics were seen by many in ancient times
as unachievable, so most people nowadays see an anarchist society as, at best, a nice dream that will never become reality. Most
people, both pessimists and ‘realists’, are namely convinced that
the majority of people need central authority (king, church, state,
laws, regulations) to keep from straying in any way from the good
path. Are these people correct, and is that necessarily always true for
everyone?
We are getting to realise what Zeno would have answered: for wise
people, these laws are totally unnecessary. They behave sensibly of
their own accord and therefore take sufficient account of public
interest. In principle it is possible for everyone to become wise, and
so it should be possible for everyone to live without laws and central
authority.
≤

A utopia is easy to think of, but the route towards it is rough, and
sometimes seems impassable. What remains is that personal and
collective wisdom are in any case things that you can strive for.
Striving to improve oneself and one’s surroundings fits well with
the natural tendencies of humans. And each shift in the direction of
the ideal is an improvement.
≤

One single individual has few possibilities to change society, since
the majority of people keep the existing social structures going.
Sometimes because of fear of change, often because people benefit
from the existing situation (or think they do). But it is not always
the case that a majority of people conform; rapid or slow social
changes, as history shows us, belong to the range of possibilities.

My idea is therefore that Stoic views, if they are consistently thought through, fit well with a left-wing, non-violent, anarchist vision
of society. Striving for such a society forms a major challenge. A
challenge that I think fits very well with the challenging ideas of
the Stoics about feeling, thinking and happiness.

The name Utopia, which Thomas More (1478-1535) invented for
his story about an ideal society, can be interpreted in two ways: as
eu topos, good place, or as ou topos, nowhere-place, non-existent
place. Whether More expressly intended this is not known, just as

180

181

≤

it is not entirely clear if he himself would have wanted to live in his
Utopia.W
I myself consider ‘utopia’ a nice word, precisely because of this
ambivalence. I see a utopia as a sketch of an ideal society, a society
that does not (yet) exist, but which it is worthwhile aiming for.
The repugnance which some people have towards the phenomenon of utopia always has something to do with the authoritarian
character which people connect to utopias, which indeed can be
found in some utopias such as Plato’s Republic and More’s Utopia.
An anarchist utopia can obviously never be authoritarian, and in a
consistent form of anarchism, the route towards it is peaceful and
without coercion.

their own personalities. In contrast to the statist ideas of Plato with
his ‘enlightened despotism’, the Stoics, according to him, put forward the ideal of ‘liberated individuals who did not emotionally tie
themselves into the polity or the economic system. In particular,
they rejected all idealisation of money and violence, of power and
authority.’Y
According to Constandse, freedom-loving principles can have a
leavening effect on any society.U He invokes Seneca here: ‘I am not
free as long as one person remains a slave.’ From this it once again
appears that you do not need to be an anarchist to invent one of
the core ideas of anarchism.I Good ideas are often simple, and are
invented time and time again—they are reasonable and human.

≤

≤

The link between Stoicism and anarchism is not new. Peter
Kropotkin (1842-1921) called the ideas of Zeno ‘the best example
of anarchist philosophy in Ancient Greece’.E In Zeno’s utopia, the
Stoic sage is both an individualist and a socially committed person.
S/he can go her/his own way, but can also co-operate well with
others. If people followed their own nature and let themselves be
guided by reason, they would be able to live in peace and harmony
without repressive institutions. In Zeno’s utopia, as described in his
Politeia, there are as I wrote earlier no courts, there are no police,
there are no armies, no temples and no schools, and money and
marriage have been abolished.
This is a great deal ‘more utopian’ than what most anarchists of
today dare to dream of.R

Many parallels can be drawn between Stoicism as a personal utopia
and anarchism as a utopia for human society: peace of mind for an
individual corresponds to peaceful coexistence for society; sensibly
thinking things through for an individual corresponds to calm
deliberations for a group of people; and just as an individual can
try to prevent and drive away strong, nagging feelings by thinking
sensibly, so people in a society can learn from each other’s wisdom
and prevent prejudice and wars from starting.
The above implies that a Stoic society can be no other than one
where people both recognise each other’s equality and live peacefully and work together side by side, without competition, without
repression, without hate. I do not know of any way in which such a
society would differ from an anarchist one.

In the practice of mutual aid, which we can retrace to the earliest beginnings of evolution, we thus find the positive and undoubted origin of
our ethical conceptions; and we can affirm that in the ethical progress of
man, mutual support not mutual struggle has had the leading part.T

≤

Just like many people in Ancient Greece and Rome, the libertarian
thinker and humanist Anton Constandse (1899-1985) saw Stoic aims
as ‘very idealistic’ regarding the possibilities for people to improve

One of the slogans of feminism around 1980 (the second wave) was
‘the personal is political’. Combining (elements from) Stoicism and
anarchism boils down to combining personal aims to political ideals. But the political and the personal are also philosophical. When
thinking about ideals, philosophy is indispensable. Everything that
I think about the personal and the political is a consequence of
judgments, and these judgments can be broadened through philosophical, critical (i.e. sceptical) inquiry.

182

183

≤

≤

How would a society of Stoics turn out? Or, more broadly, what
would the world be like if there were many modern Stoics around?
And more achievably, what would the world look like if many
people strived for Stoic wisdom? That is, if many people aimed
towards an attitude to life in which you take control, where you
actively intervene in your state of mind via your thoughts?
≤

People would talk with each other and philosophise. In this way,
they come to agreement. Friendship and love would, just as in
Zeno’s city of the wise, play an important connecting role.
People would neither rule not let themselves be ruled. Philosophy
would be the only authority: that is to say, a collection of the most
sensible thoughts from everyone.
There would be no wars—why would wars be needed without passions such as greed, hate, honour, anger or retribution, and only with
people who consider themselves and each other as cosmopolitan, as
equal inhabitants of the Earth?
People would no longer be addicted to anything at all. People
would not be afraid of being different to others.
There would be no class differences, no bosses or servants. These
words would still exist to describe the past, but in the utopia they
would have no meaning.
There would be no grab-it-all economy, no capitalism. Money
and possessions would be considered unimportant, because no one
would be greedy. Because no one would have their eyes on money,
phenomena such as interest and speculation would not exist. (If
money existed at all; after all, Zeno wanted to abolish it, and many
anarchists are of the same opinion). It would still be possible for
someone to be poor or suffer hunger because of natural circumstances, because of bad luck. Others would then rush to help—sensibly
and effectively.
Looking down on people of another gender or skin colour, or judging each other on the basis of indifferent matters such as origin,
age or any external characteristics would also not occur. People from
all over would be welcome everywhere: they are each other’s poten184

tial friends. There is no such thing as a foreigner.
The natural environment would not be destroyed. People would
take account of future generations. The Stoic person, however
modern, can never be a consumer eager for short-term pleasure.
There would be no nationalism, no resentment, no sexism, and animals would not be exploited.O
≤

All very attractive, but is it really possible to change the world?
≤

Changing is not difficult by itself. I change every day, every minute.
The world changes every second. It is actually impossible not to
change. As Heraclitus said: you cannot step twice into the same
river. I change. Everything changes.
My thoughts are a consequence of what came before them. I chanced upon Stoicism, others’ thoughts that fitted well with ideas that
I already had, and so became inspiring and evoked more questions.
In this book I have elaborated a number of these ideas, utopian and
Stoic. Perhaps these ideas in turn fit well with others’ questions and
opinions?
≤

Stoicism provides many ideas but no blueprint for an ideal society,
let alone ‘the’ ideal society. Nor does it need to. A narrowly described utopia even has its ‘scary’ sides, precisely because all decisions
come from ‘the grassroots’. Such a society can therefore never be
described fully in advance. People live their own lives and something pleasant can only come about if everyone contributes on a
voluntary basis.
≤

For an ideal society we can, like Sceptics, search and keep searching
for the best ideas, realising that we do not own the truth; like
Epicurus we can enjoy a simple life in a sensible way; we can be selfwilled and not afraid of being different, like the Cynics; we can be
laughing philosophers, actively investigating, critical and interested
185

in science, like Democritus; and above all we can try to be Stoics,
even though we will never achieve a state of perfect wisdom.
≤

The challenge remains. The signposts point in the direction of the
most pleasant, the best of all. Simply striving for this makes you
happy.
≤

What connects the philosophers discussed in this book is the
emphasis that they lay on autarkeia, on searching for your own way, if
necessary against all conventions. Someone who really goes and lives
according to her or his own ideals would probably soon bump up
against society’s laws and rules, and certainly also against all sorts
of other people’s expectations.
That is not the easiest way, but for someone who decides once and
for all to cast off the ‘yoke of internal slavery’ it is the only way.
It of course takes many individuals to achieve real social change;
many individuals who change their behaviour, let their voice be
heard and co-operate with one another.

186

FOOTNOTES
FOREWORD
1—Stoa means portico or colonnade (a covered walkway); the place where
lessons were originally given became the name of the school. (Originally also
called Zenoists.)
2—Hoe komen kringen in het water. Aardige filosofie, (How ripples appear in water.
Nice philosophy) by Weia Reinboud, and Het beste voor de aarde. Het moeilijkste
kinderboek van altijd (The best for the Earth. The most difficult children’s book ever),
by Rymke Wiersma, both published by Atalanta, September 1989.
3—Diogenes Laërtius, Uilen van Athene (Owls of Athens), extracts from Lives and
Opinions of Eminent Philosophers, translated into Dutch by J. C. B. Eykman,
Amsterdam 1966.
I. INTRODUCTION
1—Diogenes Laërtius on the Stoics, from Lives and Opinions of Eminent
Philosophers by Diogenes Laërtius, translated by Robert Drew Hicks.
Available online at http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Lives_of_the_Eminent_
Philosophers (Book VII). In later footnotes, this source is abbreviated to DL.
2—Recommendations: Tad Brennan, The Stoic Life, in which the most important components of Stoicism (particularly the core concepts) are extremely well
elaborated by a philosopher who is not afraid of providing his own interpretation;
while aimed at practical applications there is Epictetus’ ‘notebook’, Enchiridion, in
various editions; also very interesting (and entertaining) is Plutarch, On Stoic SelfContradictions, translated by various authors, http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/
hopper/text?doc=Plut.+De+Stoic+1. And then of course the already-mentioned book of Diogenes Laërtius, Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers,
in which, despite the (often funny) disjointedness, much can be read about
the Early Stoics (Book VII). See the literature list.
3—Democritus, from Rein Ferwerda’s Dutch translation with annotations,
Stofjes in het zonlicht.
4—In The Discourses of Epictetus, translated by P. E. Matheson, there are
quotes from Epictetus such as: ‘My leg you will chain—yes, but my will—no,
not even Zeus can conquer that.’ (Book I, chapter I).

187

II. THE EARLY STOA
1—In this translation, capital letters are used for terms like ‘Cynic’ and ‘Stoic’
in the philosophical sense, to make clear that these have nothing to do with
everyday phrases such as ‘what a cynic’ or ‘with stoic resignation’.
2—Hipparchia (ca. 346-300 BC) was totally enthralled with the words and
lifestyle of Crates and cared nothing for wealth, noble origin or beauty. She
also showed no interest at all in the (other) men who competed for her attention. Crates warned her: if she went to live with him she would have to live
the (frugal) life of the Cynics. There was nothing she would prefer to this.
Against her parents’ will she put on ‘Cynic’ clothes, went to live with Crates
and played a full part in philosophical discussions, giving short shrift to
those who thought that as a woman she should not do that. (DL book VI.)
3—Epicurean philosopher and poet (ca. 110-40/35 BC). Many scrolls of his
books ended up in a library in Herculaneum, where they were covered in lava
and rubble by the eruption of Vesuvius in 79 AD. The project in which the
unearthed carbonised scrolls were rolled out and deciphered using modern
techniques was named the Philodemus Project.
4—The Stoa Poikilè was a colonnade with frescoes made by famous artists (including
Polygnotus), depicting Athenian victories. This Stoa in the north-west corner
of the Athenian Agora, the market place, was built around 460 BC, and was
revealed in 1981 by American archaeologists—or rather, what remained of it:
some steps and some foundations.
5—Martha Nussbaum in the foreword to The Stoic Idea of the City by Malcolm
Schofield.
6—DL book VII, 186-189.
III. KNOWLEDGE, NATURE, COSMOS, LOGOS
1—DL book VII. This quotation was cited by Klaas Rozemond in the otherwise very enjoyable and original book Filosofie voor de zwijnen (Philosophy
for Swine) as proof that Stoics had an enormous contempt for animals.
No further evidence of this is apparent (though the Stoics were certainly
not vegans, any more than the rest of their contemporaries). I interpret the
quotation more as a hint that you can see a useful or advantageous side to
everything. Which, incidentally, is also a little dubious.
2—Wybe Wiersma. (On the thesis Peri Telos, about the aim of the Stoics, it is
written Wijbe, but I assume that the name was pronounced ‘wiebe’, just as in
my father’s passport his name appears as Hijlke, although his Frisian name
Hylke is really pronounced ‘heel-ke’. The Frisians should of course never
have agreed to interference from Holland in the spelling of Frisian words).
3—DL book VII.

188

4—DL book VII, 86.
5—DL book VII, 85.
IV. FEELINGS ARE JUDGMENTS
1—DL book VII.
2—Plutarch, quoted by M. van Straaten.
3—Sometimes in translations the word ‘grief’ is used, but I consider ‘sorrow’,
‘displeasure’ and ‘pain’ more suitable as opposites of enjoyment or pleasure.
For this, pleasure and pain are used for both bodily and ‘spiritual’ experiences.
4—DL book VII, 111-115.
V. GOODNESS, BEAUTY AND HAPPINESS
1—DL book VII, 90.
2—In Christianity and other religions, ‘virtue’ and ‘good and evil’ are loaded
words, and ‘evil’ is connected to Hell and damnation. Such threats cannot be
found in the works of the Stoics.
3—DL book VII, 93.
4—DL book VII, 92.
5—Here and there I use the word ‘enjoyment’ as a synonym for ‘pleasure’,
because pleasure usually has the connotation of short-term feelings, while
Epicurus clearly had a preference for more long-term forms of pleasure.
6—DL book VII, 27.
7—Via Google, when typing in ‘euroia biou’, many languages apart from
Greek appear, with the translations: a smooth flow of life, der gute Fluss des
Lebens, bon écoulement de la vie, livets lette strøm, the easy flow of life, the
good flowing of life, una corrente favorevole, and a Chinese version which I
do not understand..
8—The Sceptic Sextus Empiricus is in this instance sympathetic to the
Stoics.
9—DL book VII, 166-168.
10—Aristo was very eloquent and had the nickname ‘the Siren’. Zeno, however, called him a ‘chatterbox’ because he used a lot of words, while Zeno
himself was concise in speech (DL book VII, 18). Eratosthenes of Cyrene,
the greatest scientist of the time, and the third librarian of Alexandria, who
amongst other things was the first to calculate the circumference of the
Earth, was one of Aristo’s pupils.
11—DL book VII, 160.

189

VI. COSMOPOLITANISM, FRIENDSHIP AND COEXISTENCE

VII. MIDDLE STOA AND ROMAN STOA

1—Not a Stoic, but the successor of Aristotle as mentioned earlier, with
whom Zeno had taken lessons. For ‘the Stoics and the animals issue’ see also
footnote 8 of Chapter XV.
2—DL book VI, 93.
3—Anne Banateanu, La théorie stoï-cienne de l’amitié. (The Stoic theory of
friendship).
4—DL book VII, 23.
5—Anne Banateanu, op. cit.
6—DL book VII.
7—DL book VII.
8— ‘It is also their doctrine that amongst the wise there should be a community of wives with free choice of partners (…) Under such circumstances we
shall feel paternal affection for all the children alike, and there will be an end
of the jealousies arising from adultery.’ DL Book VII, 131. Comment: wise
people were therefore men, and women were seen as ‘communal possessions’
of those men—and ‘we’ should feel fatherly love. What about equality, then?
(Incidentally, this is a text of Diogenes Laërtius, so we cannot hold Zeno
responsible for it.) Were women second-class beings in Stoic philosophy?
Nowhere is any form of dichotomy apparent, like that of Aristotle. Just like
with Plato, Zeno’s ideal city was not a men’s club. Everyone was considered
capable of philosophising, men and women. Zeno argued in his Politeia for
men and women to wear the same clothes. In contrast to Plato’s Republic
where there were three classes, in Zeno’s ideal city all people were equal. Yet is
could well be so that in that area there were an awful lot of ‘blind spots’.
It is also remarkable that Zeno wanted to create circumstances in which less
or no jealousy would be generated, instead of saying: jealousy arises from
incorrect thoughts, which you can change. This whole train of thought is in
fact remarkable, because most people of today see the unattached free love
that Zeno argued for as a source of jealousy. For that matter, I agree with
Zeno that unfree love—a restricted, shy form of love—does not tally with
Stoic philosophy, because this kind of ‘love’ rests on thinking in terms of
possessions (greed, fear). It must be said that the Politeia was an early work
of Zeno. He never dissociated himself from it, but it is clear that later on his
emphasis came to lie elsewhere.
9—Wybe Wiersma.
10—G. Rodis-Lewis, La morale stoïcienne. (Stoic Morals)
11—DL book VII, 128.

1—Teun Tieleman wrote about this in his article Hellenistische filosofen: een
groepsportret (Hellenistic philosophers, a group portrait), Lampas 38 (p. 226),
2005.
2—P. A. Meijer in Plutarchus, Stoï-sche tegenstrijdigheden, (‘On the SelfContradictions of the Stoics’).
3—But even back then, opinions on these sort of issues were divided. It was
said about Diogenes the Cynic that he considered humans the most intelligent of all living beings if he looked at doctors and philosophers, but ‘when
again he saw interpreters of dreams and diviners and those who attended to
them (…) he thought no animal more silly.’ DL book VI, 24.
4—DL book VII, 103.
5—Seneca, quoted by Cornelis Verhoeven.
6—Dialogues: the Latin original is quarum experimentum sanguis et sudor est.
7—Seneca, Letters to Lucilius. Compare the English translation by Richard M.
Gummere: ‘And do you know why we have not the power to attain this Stoic
ideal? It is because we refuse to believe in our power. Nay, of a surety, there
is something else which plays a part: it is because we are in love with our vices;
we uphold them and prefer to make excuses for them rather than shake them
off. We mortals have been endowed with sufficient strength by nature, if
only we use this strength, if only we concentrate our powers and rouse them
all to help us or at least not to hinder us. The reason is unwillingness, the
excuse, inability’.
8—Seneca, Epistulae (Letters) 22. From the Dutch translation by Henk van der
Werf, apart from the last sentence, which is from the Richard M. Gummere
translation (see the previous footnote).
9—Musonius Rufus, Een oprechte stoï-cijn (Musonius Rufus, A Sincere Stoic), introduced and translated by Simone Mooij-Valk.
10—Epictetus, The Enchiridion. Some quotes are from the translation by Elizabeth
Carter, c. 1750. http://classics.mit.edu/Epictetus/epicench.html and others from
the Dutch translation with notes by Hein L. van Dolen and Charles Hupperts,
Zakboekje. Wenken voor een evenwichtig leven.
11—I came across a wall tile with this text in my parents’ house.
12—More about the ideal of lack of conflicts of interest can be found in other
publications of Atalanta: Hoe komen kringen in het water (How ripples appear in
water) and Een en een is zelden twee (One and one is rarely two), by Weia Reinboud
and Rymke Wiersma.
13—All quotations of Marcus Aurelius come from The Thoughts of Emperor
Marcus Aurelius, translated by George Long.
14—Marcus Aurelius, book X, 30. Miriam van Reijen in her book Filosoferen
over emoties (Philosophising about Emotions) speaks along the same lines when she

190

191

writes: ‘There is no reason to blame someone else, because if you thought the
same you would act in the same way. The only sensible thing is to enable the
other person to change his or her thoughts.’

12—DL book VII, 120.
13—Or half-measures; the term ‘halfness’ (halfheid) comes from Multatuli.
14—The Stoic Idea of the City by Malcolm Schofield.

VIII. SOME ATTRACTIVE IDEAS FROM THE EARLY STOA
1—But this moderation is still not an easy task: ‘so, too, anyone can get
angry– that is easy– or give or spend money; but to do this to the right person, to the right extent, at the right time, with the right motive, and in the
right way, that is not for everyone, nor is it easy; wherefore goodness is both
rare and laudable and noble. (…) For it is not easy to determine both how and
with whom and on what provocation and how long one should be angry.’
Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics (translated by W. D. Ross).

X. CYNICS, ATOMISTS AND SCEPTICS

1—The future of the universe can never be calculated, because that would
require a computer that is larger than the universe. See Hoe komen kringen
in het water (How ripples appear in water) by Weia Reinboud and Rymke
Wiersma.
2—Lawrence C. Becker. An interesting attempt to construct a new Stoicism
with the old ‘ingredients’. It is nice that here (just as, incidentally, with Tad
Brennan) the pronoun ‘she’ is used for the sage or wise person.
3—Sometimes also called Zeus … Just as with Spinoza, you may wonder if
the use of a religious concept came about because of strategic intentions. In
the case of ‘Spinozists’ it is clear that there are two schools of thought, an
atheist school and a theist (pantheist) school. Perhaps it was similar with the
‘Zenoists’, and in any case those interested in Stoicism today include both
atheists and theists (including pantheists).
4—There is more about these schools of thought in Chapter X.
5—See also Hoe komen kringen in het water.
6—Forgive me this somewhat ‘cynical’ expression …
7—Denis Diderot (1713-1784), quoted by Stendhal in his book De L’Amour
(On Love).
8—DL book VII.
9—A book from 1969. The first book that I read about the Stoics, alongside
the account of Diogenes Laërtius; I got a lot out of it. In all likelihood it can
now only be obtained second-hand, or borrowed from libraries.
10—For this, Karin Spaink coined the Dutch word orenmaffia: literally, ‘earsmafia’: those who say that symptoms originate between your ears, i.e. in your
mind.
11—See particularly the Enchiridion (‘Notebook’) of Epictetus.

1—The original Dutch text consistently uses transliterations of Greek philosophers’ names, in this case Epikouros, instead of the names they are
nowadays commonly known by, which are sometimes Latinized versions
such as Epicurus, and sometimes a transliteration of the Greek originals,
such as Chremonides. For Epicurus’ followers, I sometimes use the name
‘Epicureans’. The school as a whole is often called the Garden (kèpos).
2—Keimpe Algra, In dienst van de ethiek (In service of ethics) in Wijsgerig
Perspectief, ‘Hellenisme’ (Philosophical Perspective, ‘Hellenism’), edited by
Teun Tieleman, 2002.
3—The Cynics met in an old gymnasium just outside the city walls of Athens,
called kunosarges, ‘living dog’. Perhaps the kunikoi/Cynics were therefore
named after the place where they met, but this nickname was undoubtedly
strengthened because they felt affinity to dogs and found stray dogs in
particular inspiring for their independent and self-supporting way of life:
autarkeia.
4—DL book VI, 45.
5—DL book IX, 44 .
6—Quotations translated from Stofjes in het zonlicht, unless noted otherwise.
(‘Stofjes’.)
7—Translator Rein Ferwerda in his notes to ‘Stofjes’.
8—DL book IX, 40.
9—Epicurus, Letter about happiness, translated by Hans Warren and Mario
Molegraaf (HW/MM). Further quotations from Epicurus come from HW/
MM unless noted otherwise.
10—Here, ‘fate’ means ‘event attached to causes’, rather in the sense of chance
or ‘something that just happens’.
11—It was not for nothing that Karl Marx wrote his thesis about (the difference between the natural philosophy of ) Democritus and Epicurus.
12—DL book X, 149.
13 – ‘Diotimus the Stoic, who is hostile to him, has assailed him with bitter slanders, adducing fifty scandalous letters as written by Epicurus …’ (DL
book X, 3.)
14—DL book VII, 149: ‘Nature, they hold, aims both at utility and at pleasure
(…)’
15—Pupil of Socrates, founder of the school of Cyrene/Kurene, which championed a more radical form of Hedonism, which was less concerned about

192

193

IX. QUESTIONS, PRECONCEPTIONS AND
MISUNDERSTANDINGS

possible harm over the long term.
16—This and the previous quotation are from DL book X.
17—In the Garden, the women played a full part in philosophising.
18—Keimpe Algra, introduction to: Epicurus, Letter about happiness.
19—Thomas Hobbes was therefore not the first to think of this. But Epicurus’
solution is entirely different.
20—Keimpe Algra, introduction to: Epicurus, Letter about happiness.
21—Spinoza, Ethica.
22—DL book IX, 108. Robert Drew Hicks, the translator, adds: ‘i.e. a calm,
the opposite of an excitable, temperament: cf. Plato, Lys 211 e.’
23—Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Pyrrhonism (Scepticism). http://web.archive.
org/web/20070621153548/http://www.philosophy.leeds.ac.uk/GMR/hmp/
modules/hdc0405/units/unit05/outlines.html.
24—A friend and pupil of Parmenides was Zeno of Elea. Note: this is the Zeno
who is famous for his paradoxes about Achilles and the tortoise, etc., not to
be confused with ‘our’ Zeno of Citium, the Stoic, who lived a few centuries
later.
25—The Parmenides. According to Luciano de Crescenzo in his History of Greek
Philosophy, this is, despite Plato’s talent for writing, ‘the most boring and
complicated conversation in philosophy.’
26—Luciano de Crescenzo.
27—Sextus Empiricus (SE).
28—SE. From http://web.archive.org/web/20070621153548/http://www.philosophy.leeds.ac.uk/GMR/hmp/modules/hdc0405/units/unit05/outlines.
html.
29—Extensively described in the book The Stoic Life by Tad Brennan.
30—The description is reminiscent of ‘l’idée claire et distincte’ (the clear and
distinct idea) of René Descartes (1596-1650).
31—SE.
32—DL book IX, 91.
33—See Chapter VII of this book.
33—See Chapter V of this book.
35—SE.
36—SE (Against the Ethicists, 173).

1—Seneca, quoted in Seneca voor managers (Seneca for Managers).
2—De Martelaere/Lemmens.
3—‘In order to teach people to endure, let them practice their patience on lifeless objects which resist our actions through mechanical means or physical
necessity. Each day provides opportunities for this.’ (Arthur Schopenhauer,

1788-1860.)
4—I once read this in an article about him in a supplement to the NRC
Handelsblad newspaper.
5—See also the ideas of proponents of ‘non-violent communication’, such as
Marshall Rosenberg (see Bibliography).
6—All virtues were, according to the Stoics, forms of knowledge. Courage
they saw as the knowledge ‘of what we ought to choose, what we ought to
beware of, and what is indifferent’. (DL book VII, 92-95.)
7—In this respect I am in agreement with the ideas of Peter Kropotkin (18421921) as he describes in his book Mutual Aid.
8—Miriam van Reijen, Filosoferen over emoties (Philosophising about Emotions).
9—Miriam van Reijen, Filosoferen over emoties (Philosophising about
Emotions).
10—Dutch: vergelijkeritis. A term from Hoe komen kringen in het water (How
ripples appear in water) by Weia Reinboud, meaning ‘a propensity to compare oneself continually to others and, in doing so, worry about a possible
‘negative’ outcome.’
11—Baruch, later Benedictus de Spinoza (1632-1677) never, as far as I know,
called himself a Stoic, but there are clear similarities between the philosophy
of the Early Stoics and that of Spinoza. He was particularly in agreement
with Stoic physics (cohesion of nature, determinism). His portrayal of mankind is however rather different: according to Spinoza, we can never completely control our emotional affectations. In his best-known book, Ethica,
he said that even the Stoics had to admit that it is a major task to curb and
moderate our passions. Spinoza found that the passions did not need to be
banished; the key was to make reason a passion that could drive away all
other passions. For this, see the book Spinoza. De geest is gewillig maar het vlees
is sterk (The spirit is willing but the flesh is strong [sic]) by Miriam van Reijen
(Kampen, April 2008).
12—DL book VII, 149 about the Stoics: ‘Nature, they hold, aims both at utility and at pleasure, as is clear from the analogy of human craftsmanship.’
13—In his book On Love, Stendhal (1783-1842) describes ‘love’ (by which he
means lovesickness) as a mania, an illness, which can be healed with difficulty; healing takes at least half a year. The only remedy that speeds up healing,
according to Stendhal, is to be in constant mortal danger for an extended
period, for example on a ship during a heavy storm that lasts at least two
weeks. He also found that the object of one’s love becomes idealised. There is
also a lot of fantasising about loved ones, and these phenomena are difficult
to refute. As an extra disadvantage of lovesickness, he mentions the fact that
you lose all your interest in other things, that the rest of your life ceases to be
exciting. Lovesickness clearly causes a distortion, a strongly biased view of
reality. Nevertheless, he still pleads for people to dare to love, and denounces

194

195

XI. STRONG AFFECTATIONS, GOOD FEELINGS

those who do not recognise the phenomenon of love (lovesickness) or passion.
14—DL book VII, 118.
15—See Chapter X of this book.
16—Miriam van Reijen, Filosoferen over emoties (Philosophising about
Emotions).
17—During the last, hectic phase of writing this book, I got a lot out of
watching a number of films of the brilliant acrobat and comic Buster Keaton
(1895-1966), also called ‘The great stone face’. Whatever disasters overcame
him, he remained ‘stoic’ and tried to make the best of it. Is it too far-fetched
to call him a Stoic humourist?
18—Martha Nussbaum wondered if the radical standpoint of the Stoics about
external matters was in fact logically consistent. When the virtues named by
the Ancient Greek Stoics, such as courage, justice and frugality are looked at
in separation from material things it is difficult to see what they concretely
mean. How could you be just if food, shelter, etc. are totally insignificant?
If money is insignificant then it is surely totally inconsequential that one
person has a lot of it and another very little?
Here, however, she overlooks something that I find especially interesting: if
I am just, then I will not want to cause poverty or other adversity in others.
While if an adversity such as this affects me, the Stoic view still applies: this
adversity does not need to make me unhappy, because happiness is possible in
any situation. Happiness depends on what I think and do, and if I let myself
be led by greed (and disadvantage others) then, according to Stoic logic, I
cannot be happy. See also Chapter XIV.
19—Martha Nussbaum, Oplevingen van het denken (Revival of Thinking).
20—Tad Brennan, The Stoic Life. Emotions, Duties, & Fate.
21—DL book VII, 123: ‘Nor yet, they go on to say, will the wise man live in
solitude; for he is naturally made for society and action.’ Spinoza, who was
‘in line with the Stoics’ regarding empathy, made it clear that this does not
mean that we should let down our fellow human beings: ‘He who is moved
to help others neither by reason nor by compassion, is rightly styled inhuman
(…)’ Notes to Proposition 50 , Ethics (translated by R. H. M. Elwes).
22—DL book VII, 117.

1—This saying of Bertrand Russell, quoted by Ellis and Harper (p.125), is in
fact a variation of the ancient question of whether a Stoic would feel happy
even on the torture rack. An extreme situation is thought up in order to show
that if the theory does not hold good here, then it should not hold good in

any situation. A possible answer is: an extremely wise/Stoic individual would
be capable of experiencing happiness even in these extreme situations. It is of
course then not about enjoyment or other passive forms of happiness, but the
active, Stoic form: doing what is best in the situation. That the ‘average person’ is not capable of this does not mean that it is not possible for this average
person to work towards this ideal.
2—Gidia Jacobs: Rationeel-emotieve therapie, een praktische gids voor hulpverleners (Rational emotive behaviour therapy; a practical guide for social workers). A number of thoughts from Stoicism have been taken up by Rational
Emotive Behaviour Therapy (REBT), but the radicalness of the Early Stoa
was rejected. Striving for independence and striving not to be led by strong,
nagging feelings, in particular, was watered down in REBT. ‘To horrible situations belong suitably horrible feelings, such as anxiety or grief’, according
to Gidia Jacobs. But an unpleasant feeling is, according to the Stoics, not
attached to a particular situation, but comes about only when there is a judgment along the lines of ‘this is horrible’. In the same situation, it is possible to
think: ‘how can I solve this’ or ‘nothing can be done about it’, together with
the feelings attached to these thoughts.
Albert Ellis, the founder of REBT, and Robert Harper in their book A New
Guide to Rational Living distance themselves from the start from ‘orthodox
Stoicism or other utopian creeds’ (p.7). They concentrate on what is achievable for many people, not just for heroes or ascetics. REBT is intended for
practical application, and practitioners perhaps think that they must therefore take a more pragmatic position, but in doing so they miss a great deal of
the challenging aspects of Early Stoicism, as well as the adventure of thinking
that is philosophy.
3—Hoe komen kringen in het water (How ripples appear in water) by Weia
Reinboud and Rymke Wiersma.
4—See his book Van nature goed (Good Natured).
5—From this can also be deduced that what is classified as ‘good’ behaviour is
not fixed, but depends on the whole situation. On the one hand, from ‘what
is’ can be deduced ‘what ought’, but ‘what ought’ is not fixed, and is dependent on the wishes and ideals of individuals and groups.
6—Peter Marshall.
7—See Een en een is zelden twee (One and one is rarely two), by Weia Reinboud
and Rymke Wiersma.
8—Funnily enough, years after Weia had written this and we published
this pamphlet about ‘anti-authoritarian ethics’, I came across a book about
Spinoza in which the same logical reasoning appears. Spinoza too saw
goodness and evil apparently not as symmetrical or coincidental matters.
The writer of that book, H. G. Hubbeling, concluded that Spinoza may
have shared a number of ideas about humanity with Hobbes, but not his

196

197

XIII. HAPPINESS

pessimism, because 1. people would try to promote each other’s happiness
through equality and agreement, 2. love is stronger than hate (because positive feelings are more active and because grief shrinks the possibilities for
action), 3. because reason unites people, the group of people living according
to reason eventually becomes larger than the others, because the latter remain
divided, and 4. that people need each other in order to stand firm in life and
therefore that nothing is as useful for humans as their fellow humans. H. G.
Hubbeling, Spinoza.
XIV. THE STOIC AS WORLD CITIZEN
1—DL book VI.
2—Chrysippus: DL book VII, 189.
3—DL book VII, and Hans Dijkhuis, De machtige filosoof (The Powerful
Philosopher).
XV. THE NON-STOIC SOCIETY
1—Even sensible, considered enjoyment in the manner of Epicurus is a rarity,
but the ‘Slow Food’ movement seems to me to be a good example of it.
2—Justice sounds like an absolute value, just like ‘having a right to …’ It is a
word that I mostly try to avoid, because it is difficult to define. But if Stoics
take justice to mean ‘fair distribution and suchlike’, I find this clear enough,
and so I use the word in this book. From feminists there is also criticism of
this ‘rational’ concept that male philosophers came up with, and there is a
preference for, e.g. the concept of ‘care’. Care for each other could also be
named as a virtue or quality. I think that I have already made it clear enough
that concern for others is part and parcel of my interpretation of Stoic ethics.
Not just particular feminists, but also some (other) left-wingers sometimes
seem in the same way to have something against rationality and logical thought. Indeed, particular forms of logical thinking can be used to ‘justify’ bad
things (more accurately, to make excuses for them), but that has nothing to
do with the reasonableness or rationality which the Stoics alluded to. If anything is irrational, fighting wars is, and if anything is rational, cooperation
is. The so-called feminine feelings, such as tenderness, commitment and carefulness, arise from rational thoughts; women are definitely not less rational
than men (quite the contrary, I would almost say). Therefore, the somewhat
practical virtue ‘caring for each other’ is also rational.
If particular thoughts cause particular feelings, this means that those rational, sensible thoughts also bring feelings with them. The more sensible, the
more pleasant the feelings are; the more rational, the more eupatheiai (good
feelings in the Stoic sense).

198

3—La servitude volontaire. After his early death, his close friend Michel de
Montaigne arranged for copies to be made of the text. One of these copies
was preserved, and published (only in) 1853. Étienne de la Boétie died very
young, to the great distress of Montaigne.
4—Étienne de la Boétie, La servitude volontaire.
5—Étienne de la Boétie (EdlB).
6—EdlB. Mithridates the Great (120-63 BC) fought the Romans in Asia
Minor; he was continually afraid that he would be poisoned.
7—Concerning Stoics and power, there is also the following argument:
To the extent that power is inflicting suffering, a Stoic would say that you can withdraw from power, because a Stoic does not care for bodily pain or external situations. Now, suffering is indeed not such a good criterion, because a dentist can also
inflict suffering; it is more about damage, damage to someone’s interests. But a Stoic
once again escapes by saying that nothing that another can do can damage my real
interests; I am always free if I know those real interests. Power generally means a restriction on freedom to choose, but according to the Stoics, you can always choose to
make this restriction insignificant, and so you can choose for yourself whether you are
within someone else’s power. If that were the case, all power would rest on illusion.
The Stoic argument shows that whether A has power over B depends not only on the
activities that A can do in relation to B, but also on the importance that B ascribes to
these activities. You do not say that B is in the power of A if what A can do for B is
totally unimportant, if it is something that B shall possibly ignore.
I came across this interesting train of thought in the Encyclopaedia of
Philosophy; this is a paraphrase of the original text.
8—Luciano de Crescenzo, Geschiedenis van de Griekse filosofie. Socrates en daarna.
(The History of Greek Philosophy. Volume 2: Socrates and beyond.)
XVI. UTOPIA
1—See Time for Anarchy and Anarchy? What’s that? (both online at http://www.
at-a-lanta.nl/opdezesite.html).
2—Hans Achterhuis suspects that More intended his story as a joke. Hans
Achterhuis, Utopie (Utopia); Amsterdam 2006.
3—Peter Marshall, Demanding the Impossible. A History of anarchism.
4—Considering that an ideal society (a utopia) is something that is in principle possible rests on at least two premises: people can change (excellence/
arete depends on knowledge and can therefore be learned—a starting point of
Stoics), and ‘good’ (cooperation, friendship, care for yourself and others) is
stronger than ‘evil’ (egotism, greed, destructiveness). Earlier, I mentioned the
‘law of unpredictable progress’, which corresponds to the Stoic principle that
more knowledge/insight leads to wisdom and thereby to ‘doing good’. This
‘good’ is not something obedient or dutiful. It is indeed something beautiful,

199

but not something elevated; it is ‘simply’ a part of nature. The Stoics strove
towards ‘living in agreement with nature’. That this saying is somewhat problematic was mentioned earlier; here it is about the good not being supernatural but something that is simply part of nature. Care (love) for their young
is innate in many animals. Cooperation is for social animals in the interest of
the species. (Frans de Waal wrote many interesting anecdotes about anthropoid apes. He also, incidentally, wrote appreciatively about Kropotkin.)
5—Peter Kropotkin, Mutual Aid, A Factor of Evolution—quotation taken from
http://dwardmac.pitzer.edu/Anarchist_Archives/kropotkin/mutaidcontents.html.
6—Anton Constandse, Het soevereine Ik. Het individualisme van Lao-tse tot
Friedrich Nietzsche, (The sovereign I: individualism from Lao-tse to Friedrich
Nietzsche).
7—Anton Constandse en het anarchisme, (Anton Constandse and anarchism),
De AS 39/40.
8—The anarchist Michael Bakunin (1814-1876) wrote something similar in
his work Man, Society and Freedom (translated by Sam Dolgoff in Bakunin on
Anarchy, 1971): ‘I am not myself free or human until or unless I recognize the
freedom and humanity of all my fellowmen.’
9—What was the opinion of the Early Stoics on whether or not to eat or
otherwise make use of animals? In quotes of, or about, Stoics and food, I
have rarely come across ingredients from animals; bread, figs and olives were
mentioned a lot. Traditional Stoicism in any case applies the argument of frugality. Animal products were a luxury food for Ancient Greeks. More important for rejecting the use of animals, however, is the argument that animals
also have the ‘right’ to exist in freedom and without human disturbance. In
other words, the recognition that the virtue of justice is also applicable to
animals. For this last argument, there is little inspiration to be found in the
writings of Early Stoics. It is notable that even in antiquity, this was already
a thorny issue. According to the vegetarian Plutarch, who in any case strongly
criticised the Stoa in his Moralia, the Stoic Chrysippus saw animals only as
beings which could be useful for humans. Of course, the concentric circles of
Hierocles (see Chapter VI) can be extended to the kingdom of non-human
animals.

200

BIBLIOGRAPHY
—Achterhuis, Hans, De erfenis van de utopie (The Heritage of Utopia),
Amsterdam 1998.
—Achterhuis, Hans, Utopie (Utopia), Amsterdam 2006.
—Arnold, E. Vernon, Roman Stoicism, London 1958.
—Aristotle, Ethica (Ethics) Dutch translation, introduced by Christine Pannier
and Jean Verhaeghe, Groningen 1999. Aristotle, Nicomachaen Ethics, translated by W. D. Ross, MIT Classics Series, online at http://classics.mit.edu/
Aristotle/nicomachaen.html.
—Banateanu, Anne, La théorie stoïcienne de l’amitié (The Stoic Theory of
Friendship), Fribourg 2001.
—Becker, Lawrence C., A New Stoicism, Princeton 1998.
—Bergsma, Ad, Emoties en kwaliteit van bestaan. Een psychologische theorie over
de kwaliteit van het bestaan (Emotions and qualities of existence: a psychological theory about the quality of existence), Utrecht 1995.
—Boëthius, The Consolation of Philosophy, translated by H.R. James, London
1897; available online at Project Gutenberg, http://www.gutenberg.org/
ebooks/14328.
—Boétie, Étienne de la, Discours sur la servitude volontaire, 1549. English translation Discourse on Voluntary Servitude, translated by Harry Kurz, New York
1942, available online at http://www.constitution.org/la_boetie/serv_vol.
htm. Dutch translation: De vrijwillige slavernij, translated by Dick Gevers and
Bart Schellekens, Amsterdam 1999.
—Bor, Jan, Errit Petersma and Jelle Kingma, De verbeelding van het denken
(The Imagination of Thinking), Amsterdam/Antwerp 1995.
—Botton, Alain de, The Consolations of Philosophy, London 2001.
—Brennan, Tad, The Stoic Life. Emotions, Duties, & Fate, Oxford 2005.
—Broekhoven, Remko van, Staat van tederheid. Tussen beest en supermens (State
of tenderness. Between beast and superhuman), Amsterdam 2007.
—Brown, Eric, Stoic Psychopathology, Internet 2006, online at www.artsci.
wustl.edu/~eabrown/pdfs/Psychopathology.pdf.
—Bruckner, Pascal, L’Euphorie perpétuelle. Essai sur le devoir de bonheur, Paris
2000. English translation: Perpetual Euphoria. On the duty to be happy, translated by Steven Rendall, Princeton 2010. Dutch translation: Gij zult gelukkig
zijn, translated by Walter van der Star, Amsterdam 2002.
—Cambridge Companion to the Stoics, Brad Inwood (Ed.), Cambridge 2003.
—Cicero, Marcus Tullius, De finibus bonorum et malorum (On the Ends of

201

Good and Bad Things). English translation by Harris Rackham, London
1914. Dutch translation (De horizon van wel en wee) with introduction and
notes by Joan van der Linden, Baarn 1982.
–Cicero, Marcus Tullius, Filosofische teksten (Philosophical Texts) translated
by E. de Laet and J. Ector, Antwerp 1982.
—Cicero, Marcus Tullius, De amicitia (On Friendship). English translation
by Andrew P. Peabody, online http://ancienthistory.about.com/library/bl/
bl_text_cic_friendship.htm. Dutch translation (Over vriendschap) by W.A.M.
Peters, Baarn 1990.
—Cicero, Marcus Tullius, On Duties, Griffin & Atkins, Cambridge 1991.
—Cicero, Marcus Tullius, De kleine Cicero. Mensen en goden (A small guide to
Cicero: People and Gods). Dutch translation by V. J. C. Hunink, Amsterdam
1999.
—Cicero, Marcus Tullius, De Fato (On Fate). Dutch translation (Lotsbeschikking)
by Tj. H. Janssen, Amsterdam, Meppel 1992.
—Constandse, Anton, Het soevereine Ik. Het individualisme van Lao-tse tot
Friedrich Nietzsche (The sovereign I. Individualism from Lao-tse to Friedrich
Nietzsche), Amsterdam 1983.
—Coolsaet, Willy, Autarkeia, Rivaliteit en zelfgenoegzaamheid in de Griekse cultuur (Autarchy. Rivalry and conceitedness in Greek culture), Kampen 1993.
—Crescenzo, Luciano de, Storia della filosofia greca. English translation:
History of Greek Philosophy. Volume 1: The Pre-Socratics, London 1989. Dutch
translation (Geschiedenis van de Griekse filosofie. De presocraten), by Yond Boeke
and Patty Krone, Amsterdam 1986.
—Crescenzo, Luciano de, Storia della filosofia greca. English translation:
History of Greek Philosophy. Volume 2: Socrates and Beyond, London 1989. Dutch
translation (Geschiedenis van de Griekse filosofie. Socrates en daarna), by Martine
Vosmaer, Amsterdam 1988.
—Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, Finding Flow: The Psychology of Engagement With
Everyday Life, New York 1998. Dutch translation De weg naar flow by Henk
Moerdijk, Amsterdam 1999.
—Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, Flow, The Psychology of Optimal Experience, New
York 1990. Dutch translation Flow, psychologie van de optimale ervaring by
Henk Moerdijk, Amsterdam 1999.
—Damasio, Antonio R., De vergissing van Descartes. Gevoel, verstand en het
menselijk brein (The Mistake of Descartes. Feeling, Reason and the Human
Brain), Amsterdam 1998.
—Damasio, Antonio R., Het gelijk van Spinoza. Vreugde, verdriet en het voelende brein (The Rightness of Spinoza. Joy, Grief and the Feeling Brain),
Amsterdam 2003.
—Demokritos, Stofjes in het zonlicht (Dust Particles in Sunlight). Dutch translation with explanations by Rein Ferwerda, Amsterdam 1998.

—Dennett, Daniel C. Consciousness Explained, New York 1991. Dutch translation (Het bewustzijn verklaard) by Ton Maas and Frits Smeets, Amsterdam/
Antwerp 1993.
—Diderot, Denis, Brieven aan Sophie (Letters to Sophie Volland). Dutch translation and afterword by Anneke Brassinga, Amsterdam 1995.
—Diderot, Denis, Ecrits philosophiques, Utrecht 1964.
—Diekstra, René, Als leven pijn doet (If Life is Painful), Utrecht 1990.
—Diekstra, René, Persoonlijk onderhoud, zakboek voor zelfanalyse (Personal
maintenance, a notebook for self-analysis), Utrecht 1993.
—Diekstra, René, Ik kan denken/voelen wat ik wil (I can think/feel what I
want), Amsterdam 1976.
—Dijkhuis, Hans, De machtige filosoof. Een andere geschiedenis van de Griekse
wijsbegeerte (The Powerful Philosopher. An Alternative History of Greek philosophy), Amsterdam 2007.
—Diogenes Laërtius, Uilen van Athene, gedeelten uit ‘Leven en leer van beroemde filosofen’, (Owls of Athens, extracts from Lives and Opinions of Eminent
Philosophers). Dutch translation by J. C. B. Eykman, Amsterdam 1966.
—Diogenes Laërtius, Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers. English
translation by Robert Drew Hicks, Harvard 1925; available online at http://
en.wikisource.org/wiki/Lives_of_the_Eminent_Philosophers. Dutch translation (Leven en leer van beroemde filosofen) by Rein Ferwerda and Jan Eykman,
Baarn 1989.
—Donselaar, G. van, Van the Fragility of Goodness naar the Goodness of Fragility.
Martha Nussbaum over ethiek (From the Fragility of Goodness to the Goodness
of Fragility. Martha Nussbaum on Ethics), Filosofie Magazine, April 1999.
—Dresden, S., Montaigne, de spelende wijsgeer (Montaigne, the playful philosopher), Leiden 1952.
—Epictetus, De kolleges van Epictetus (The Lectures of Epictetus). Dutch translation by D. C. Hesseling, Haarlem 1931.
—Epictetus, Levenskunst. Naar zijn ‘encheiridion’ of handboekje en zijn ‘gesprekken’ (Savoir-vivre. Towards his ‘enchiridion’ or handbook and his ‘conversations’). Dutch translation by Dr II, Zutphen 1932.
—Epicurus, Brief over het geluk, (Letter about happiness). Dutch translation
with introduction and notes by Keimpe Algra, Groningen 1995.
—Epicurus, Over het geluk (On Happiness). Dutch translation and explanations by Hans Warren and Mario Molegraaf, Amsterdam 1995.
—Epiktetos (Epictetus), Enchiridion. English translation by Thomas W.
Higginson, New York 1948. Dutch translation (Zakboekje, wenken voor een
evenwichtig leven -Handbook, tips for a balanced life) with explanations by
Hein L. van Dolen and Charles Hupperts, Nijmegen 1994.
—Ellis, Albert and Robert Harper, A New Guide to Rational Living, Englewood
Cliffs, 1961.

202

203

—Ellis, Albert, Hoe je met een ‘neuroot’ kunt leven (How you can live with a
‘neurotic’), Nijkerk 1976.
—Encyclopedia of Philosophy, (ed. Paul Edwards) New York 1972.
—Forrest, W. G., The Emergence of Greek Democracy 800-400 BC, New York
1966.
—Fretz, Leo, Ethiek als wetenschap, een kritische inleiding in de filosofische ethiek
(Ethics as a Science, a critical introduction to philosophical ethics), Meppel
1980.
—Frijda, Nico, De emoties. Een overzicht van onderzoek en theorie (The Emotions.
An overview of research and theory), Amsterdam 1988.
—Fromm, Erich, The Art of Loving, New York 1956.
—Fromm, Erich, Man for Himself; An Inquiry into the Psychology of Ethics, New
York 1947.
—Gaasenbeek, Bert, Rudolf de Jong, Pieter Edelman, Anton Constandse, Leven
tegen de stroom in (Living against the stream), Breda 1999.
—Gerbrandy, Piet, De mens is een dier dat kan denken. Een bloemlezing uit de
Griekse en Romeinse filosofie (The human is an animal that can think. An
anthology of Greek and Roman philosophy), Amsterdam/Antwerpen 2001.
—Geus, Marius de, Ecologische utopieën, Ecotopia’s en het milieudebat (Ecological
Utopias. Ecotopias and the Environmental Debate), Utrecht 1996.
—Goleman, Daniel, Emotional Intelligence, New York 1995.
—Gorgias, Het woord is een machtig heerser (The Word is a Powerful Ruler).
Dutch translation by Vincent Hunink, introduction Jeroen A. E. Bons, afterword Jaap Mansfeld, Groningen 1996.
—Gottlieb, Anthony, The Dream of Reason. A history of philosophy from the
Greeks to the Renaissance, New York 2010.
—Grimal, Pierre, Marc Aurèle (Marcus Aurelius), Paris 1991. Dutch translation
(Marcus Aurelius, een biografie) by Eveline van Hemert, Baarn 1994.
—Hadot, Pierre, Philosophy as a Way of Life, Oxford 1995.
—Haring, Bas, De ijzeren wil. Over bewustzijn, het brein en denkende machines (The Iron Will. On consciousness, the brain and thinking machines),
Amsterdam/Antwerp 2003.
—Honoré, Carl, In Praise of Slow. How a worldwide movement is challenging the
cult of speed, London 2005.
—Hubbeling, H. G., Spinoza, Baarn 1966.
—Hume, David, An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding, London 1748.
—Jacobs, Gidia, Rationeel-emotieve therapie, een praktische gids voor hulpverleners (Rational Emotive Behaviour Therapy, a practical guide for social workers), Houten/Diegem 1998.
—Jong, K. H. E. de, Spinoza en de Stoa (Spinoza and the Stoics), Leiden 1939.
—Klever, Wim, Een nieuwe Spinoza (A New Spinoza), Amsterdam 1995.
—Koolschijn, Gerard, De strijd tegen het democratische beest (The struggle

against the democratic beast), Amsterdam 1996.
—Kropotkin, Peter, Mutual Aid. A Factor of Evolution, London 1993.
—Kropotkin, Peter, Wederzijdse Hulp (Mutual Aid). Dutch translation by
Fanny Mac Leod-Maertens, revised by Kelderuitgeverij, with a foreword by
Marius de Geus, Utrecht 2004.
—Kropotkin, Peter, Memoires of a Revolutionist, Boston/New York 1988.
Available online at http://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/petr-kropotkinmemoirs-of-a-revolutionist.
—La Mettrie, Julien Offray de, L’homme machine, Paris 1748. English translation http://vserver1.cscs.lsa.umich.edu/~crshalizi/LaMettrie/Machine/,
Dutch translation (De mens een machine) with introduction by Hans W. Bakx,
Amsterdam/Meppel 1978.
—Levi, Primo, Se questo è un uomo, 1947. English translation: If This a Man by
Stuart Woolf, London 1959.
—Ley, Herman de, Antieke Wijsbegeerte: Van Thales tot Augustinus (Ancient
Philosophy: From Thales to Augustine), Internet 2005 , online at www.flwi.
rug.ac.be.
—Long, A. A., and D. N. Sedley, The Hellenistic Philosophers, Cambridge
1987.
—Lucretius, De Rerum Natura. English translation (Of the Nature of Things)
by William Ellery Leonard online at http://onlinebooks.library.upenn.edu/
webbin/gutbook/lookup?num=785. Dutch translation (Atomen tegen goden)
by Rutgers v.d. Loeff, Hilversum/Antwerp 1966.
—Manschot, Henk, Leven als vriend. Het revolutionaire humanisme van de Stoa
(Living as friends. The revolutionary humanism of the Stoics), in Perspectieven
op vriendschap (Perspectives on Friendship), ed. Frans Vosman and Brecht
Molenaar, Amsterdam 2005.
—Marcus Aurelius, The Thoughts of Emperor Marcus Aurelius Antoninus. English
translation by George Long, available online at http://en.wikisource.org/
wiki/The_Thoughts_of_the_Emperor_Marcus_Aurelius_Antoninus. Dutch
translation and introduction Persoonlijke notities (Personal Notes) by Simone
Mooij-Valk, Baarn 1994.
—Marinoff, Lou, Plato, Not Prozac! Applying Eternal Wisdom to Everyday
Problems, New York 1999.
—Marshall, Peter, Demanding the Impossible. A History of Anarchism, London
1993.
—Martelaere, Patricia de (ed.), Het dubieuze denken. Geschiedenis en vormen van
wijsgerig scepticism (Dubious Thinking. History and Forms of Philosophical
Scepticism), Kampen 1996.
—Martelaere, Patricia de, and Willem Lemmens (eds.), David Hume, filosoof van de menselijke natuur (David Hume, philosopher of human nature),
Kapellen/Kampen 2001.

204

205

—Martelaere, Patricia de, Wie is er bang voor de dood (Who is afraid of death?)
Titus Brandsma lecture, Nijmegen 2001.
—Montaigne, Michel de, Essais van Michel de Montaigne (Essays of Michel de
Montaigne). Dutch translation by André Abeling and Jos Tielens, nine essays
selected by Jos Tielens, Zutphen 1992.
—Musonius Rufus, Een oprechte stoïcijn (Musonius Rufus, a Sincere Stoic).
Dutch translation and introduction by Simone Mooij-Valk, Den Bosch
2006.
—Nadler, Steven, Spinoza: A Life, Cambridge 1999.
—Nicolai, Nelleke, Vrouwenhulpverlening en psychiatrie (Women’s Aid and
Psychiatry), Amsterdam 1992.
—Nietzsche, Friedrich, Die fröhliche Wissenschaft, Chemnitz 1882. English
translation (The Joyful Wisdom) by Paul V. Cohn and Maude D. Petre, New
York 1924, available online at https://archive.org/details/completenietasch10nietuoft.
—Nussbaum, Martha C., The Therapy of Desire, Theory and Practice in Hellenistic
Ethics, Princeton 1994.
—Nussbaum, Martha, Love’s knowledge: essays on philosophy and literature,
New York 1990.
—Nussbaum, Martha, Upheavals of thought: the intelligence of emotions,
Cambridge 2001.
—Onfray, Michel, Cynismes, portrait du philosophe en chien (Cynism, portrait of
the dog-like philosopher), Paris 1990.
—Osborn, Susan M., and Gloria G. Harris, Assertive training for women,
Springfield 1975.
—Parret, Herman (ed.), In alle redelijkheid (According to Reason), Amsterdam/
Meppel 1989.
—Pellikaan-Engel, Maja, Het recept van Calypso. Klassieke teksten in een hedendaags filosofisch perspectief (The Recipe of Calypso. Classical texts in a contemporary philosophical perspective), Budel 2004.
—Petit Larousse, Paris 1959.
—Plato, Phaedrus, from The Dialogues of Plato. English translation with analyses and introductions by Benjamin Jowett, Oxford 1892.
—Plato, Politeia. English translation, Republic, with comments by Benjamin
Jowett, Oxford 1892. Dutch translation, Het bestel, by Hans Warren and
Mario Molegraaf, Amsterdam 2000.
—Plutarchus, Moralia, collection of online English translations at http://www.
attalus.org/info/moralia.html.
—Plutarchus, On Stoic Self-Contradictions, English translation edited by
William W. Goodwin, Cambridge Massachusetts 1874.
—Plutarch Plutarchus over het vleescheten (Plutarch on meat-eating).Dutch
translation and notes by Lida Content, published by the Dutch Vegetarians’

Society, The Hague (pre-war, undated).
—Poldervaart, Saskia, Tegen conventioneel fatsoen en zekerheid. Het uitdagende
feminisme van de utopisch socialisten (Against conventional respectability and
security. The challenging feminism of the utopian socialists), Amsterdam
1993.
—Popper, Karl, De groei van kennis (The Growth of Knowledge). Dutch translation of selections from Popper’s Conjectures and Refutations (1963) by Zeno
Swijtink, Meppel 1978.
—Pott, Heleen, De liefde van Alcibiades, over de rationaliteit van emoties (The love
of Alcibiades; on the rationality of emotions), Amsterdam 1992.
—Prisma van de filosofie. Filosofen en filosofische begrippen verklaard (Prisma
Dictionary of Philosophy. Philosophers and philosophical concepts
explained), Utrecht 1990.
—Rawls, John, A Theory of Justice, Cambridge Massachusetts 1971.
—Ramaer, Hans (ed.), De piramide der tirannie. Anarchisten in Nederland (The
Pyramid of Tyranny. Anarchists in the Netherlands), Amsterdam 1977.
—Ramaer, Hans, Het onbegrepen anarchisme (Misunderstood Anarchism),
Moerkapelle 2003.
—Reijen, Miriam van, Filosofie en hulpverlening (Philosophy and Social
Work), Baarn 1984.
—Reijen, Miriam van, Filosoferen over emoties (Philosophising about
Emotions), Baarn 1995.
—Reijen, Miriam van (ed.), Emoties, Van stoï-cijnse apatheia tot heftige liefde
(Emotions. From Stoic apatheia to lovesickness), Kampen 2005.
—Reinboud, Weia, en Rymke Wiersma, Hoe komen kringen in het water (How
Ripples Appear in Water), Utrecht 1989.
—Reinboud, Weia, Tijd voor de anarchie. Over enige misverstanden rond anarchisme, Utrecht 1991. English translation, Time for Anarchy: some misunderstandings concerning anarchism by Peetje Lanser, available online at http://www.
at-a-lanta.nl/anarchie.htm.
—Reinboud, Weia, en Rymke Wiersma, Eén en één is zelden twee (One and
One is Rarely Two), Utrecht 1993.
—Rodis-Lewis, Geneviève, La morale stoïcienne (Stoic morals), Paris 1970.
—Rombouts, Hetty, Echt verliefd. Analyse van een emotie (Really in love.
Analysis of an emotion), Meppel 1992.
—Rosenberg, Marshall B., Nonviolent Communication: A Language of Life,
Encinitas, 2003.
—Rozemond, Klaas, Filosofie voor de zwijnen. Over geluk van dier en mens
(Philosophy for Swine. About happiness of animals and humans), Diemen
2004.
—Sandbach, F. H., The Stoics, London 1975.
—Schmid, Wilhelm, Philosophie der Lebenskunst. Eine Grundlegung (Philosophy

206

207

of the Art of Living. An Introduction), Frankfurt am Main 1998.
—Schofield, Malcolm, The Stoic Idea of the City, with a foreword by Martha
Nussbaum, Chicago/London 1999.
—Schopenhauer, Arthur, Bespiegelingen over levenswijsheid (Reflections
on Wisdom). Dutch translation by Hans Driessen of part of Parerga und
Paralipomena, Amsterdam 1992.
—Seneca, Lucius Annaeus, Moral letters to Lucilius. English translation by
Richard Mott Gummere, Cambridge Massachusetts 1920. Available online
at http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Moral_letters_to_Lucilius.
—Seneca, Seneca voor managers. Kernspreuken uit ‘Brieven aan Lucilius’ (Seneca
for Managers. Aphorisms from ‘Letters to Lucilius’). Dutch translation by
Gaby vanden Berghe, Tielt 1987, introduced by Georg Schoeck.
—Seneca, De weg naar wijsheid. Raadgevingen uit de Epistulae Morales (The
Way to Wisdom. Advice from the Epistulae Morales). Dutch translation by
Mathieu de Bakker, Nijmegen 1998.
—Seneca, Lucius Annaeus, Dialogen (Dialogues). Dutch translation with
introduction and notes by TJ. H. Janssen, Amsterdam 2001.
—Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Pyrrhonism (Scepticism), online at http://
web.archive.org/web/20070621153548/http://www.philosophy.leeds.ac.uk/
GMR/hmp/modules/hdc0405/units/unit05/outlines.html.
—Thoreau, Henry David, Civil Disobedience, London 1984.
—Sijtsma, Menno, A Proposal for Egalitarian Liberals and Others, Amsterdam,
undated.
—Simpelaar, Liesbeth, Gedeelde menselijkheid. De politieke ethiek van Martha
Nussbaum (Shared humanity. The political ethics of Martha Nussbaum),
Lover 1999 issue 1, Amsterdam 1999.
—Sitskoorn, Margriet, Het maakbare brein. Gebruik je hersens en word wie je wilt
zijn (The Improvable Brain. Use your brains and become who you want to
be), Amsterdam 2006.
—Sharples, Robert W., Stoics, Epicureans and Sceptics. An Introduction to
Hellenistic Philosophy, London 1996.
—Spaink, Karin, Het strafbare lichaam. De orenmaffia, kwakdenken en het
placebo-effect, (The punishable body. The ‘all-in-the-mind’ brigade, quack
thinking and the placebo effect), Amsterdam 1999.
—Spinoza, Benedict de, The Chief Works of Benedict de Spinoza. English translation from the Latin, with an Introduction by R.H.M. Elwes, vol. 2 De
Intellectus Emendatione—Ethica. (Select Letters). Revised edition, London,
1901. Available online at http://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/1711.
—Stendhal, De l’amour (On Love), Paris 1822.
—Stirner, Max, Der Einzige und sein Eigentum, Stuttgart 1985. English translation (The Ego and His Own) by Benjamin R. Tucker, New York 1907, available
online at http://www.df.lth.se/~triad/stirner/.

—Stone, I. F., The Trial of Socrates, New York 1988.
—Stoic Voice Journal, e-mail messages 2002, 2003.
—Störig, Hans-Joachim, Kleine Weltgeschichte der Philosophie (A Small World
History of Philosophy), Frankfurt am Main 2010.
—Straaten, M. van, Kerngedachten van de Stoa (Central Ideas of the Stoics),
Roermond 1969.
—Tieleman, Teun (ed.), Hellenisme (Hellenism), Wijsgerig Perspectief, Vol. 42
Issue 3, Amsterdam 2003.
—Tieleman, Teun, Chrysippus’ On Affections. Reconstruction and Interpretation,
Leiden 2003.
—Tieleman, Teun, Hellenistische filosofen: een groepsportret (Hellenistic philosophers: a group portrait), Lampas 38, Zwolle 2005.
—Verhoeven, Cornelis, Seneca, een apathische stoï-cijn? (Seneca, an apathetic
Stoic?), Filosofie, September 1999.
—Verhulst, Jan, RET jezelf (a Dutch self-help guide to Rational Emotive
Behaviour Therapy), Amsterdam 1996.
—Vidal, Léo, and Corinne Monnet, Au-delà du personnel. Pour une transformation politique du personnel, Lyon 1997. Available online at infokiosques.net/
IMG/pdf/Audela.pdf.
—Vucht Tijssen, Lieteke van, and Willem van Reijen, Kennis & werkelijkheid,
benaderingen (Knoweldge and reality; approaches), Muiderberg 1991.
—Waal, Frans de, Good Natured. The Origins of Right and Wrong in Humans and
Other Animals, Cambridge Massachusetts 1997.
—Waal, Frans de, Our Inner Ape, New York 2005.
—Watzlawick, Paul, The Situation Is Hopeless But Not Serious (The Pursuit of
Unhappiness), London 1993.
–Werf, Henk van der, Seneca, Achtergrond en actualiteit van zijn levensfilosofie
(Seneca, Background and Topicality of his Philosophy of Life), Baarn 1999.
—Wesiack, W., Angst aankunnen. Creatief omgaan met de angst ziek te
worden (Managing Fear. Creative approaches to the fear of becoming ill),
Amsterdam 1992.
—Wiersma, Rymke, and Weia Reinboud, Het beste voor de aarde. Het moeilijkste kinderboek van altijd (The best for the Earth. The hardest children’s book
ever), Utrecht 1989.
—Wiersma, Rymke, Zelfmacht of autonomie, dat is de belangrijkste macht (Selfpower or autonomy, that is the most important power), interview with
Miriam van Reijen, Buiten de Orde 1999, issue 4, Utrecht 1999.
—Wiersma, Wybe, Peri Telos, studie over de leer van het volmaakte leven in de
ethiek van de oude Stoa (Peri Telos, a study on the doctrine of the perfect life in
the ethics of the Early Stoics), Groningen 1937.
—Wikipedia (Internet encyclopedia) en.wikipedia.org
—Wilkeshuis, C., Diderot, The Hague 1963.

208

209

| 600
|

| 500
|

| 400
|

| 300
|

| 200
|

| 200
|

Plato
427-347
academy

Arcesilaus
316-242
academy

Carneades
214-129
academy

Carneades
214-129
academy

Socrates
469-399
Pythagoras
570-500

Aristotle
384-322
Antisthenes
446-366
cynic
Diogenes
404-323
cynic

Parmenides
540-480

Crates
366-286
cynic
Heraclitus
530-470

Aristippus
435-356
hedonist

Hipparchia
346-300
Diogenes of
Babylon
240-150 stoic

Cleanthes
331-232
stoic

Thales 624-545
naturalist

Diogenes of
Babylon
240-150 stoic

Seneca
4 voor 0-65
stoic
Epictetus
50-120
stoic

Hierocles
2e eeuw
stoic

Musonius
Rufus 30-100
stoic

Marcus
Aurelius
121-180

Posidonius
135-51
stoic

Epicurus
342-271
atomist

Lucretius
99-55

Pyrrho
360-270
sceptic

|
| 600

|
| 500

|
| 400

| 200
|

Plutarch
50-125

Panaetius
185-110
stoic

Aristo
320-250
stoic

Democritus
460-370
atomist

| 100
|

TIMELINE OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS
The centuries are indicated at the top and the bottom, with the year 200
BC appearing on both left-hand and right-hand pages. The width of a
box indicates the lifespan of the philosopher (two philosophers appear on
both pages). A large number of dates should be qualified with ‘circa’ as
there is little agreement on what the correct dates should be.
As far as possible, philosophers from the same school have been placed
alongside each other so that successors are horizontally adjacent or along
a diagonal line (see Zeno, Cleanthes and Chrysippus). The pupils of
Socrates, however, do not appear next to each other (Plato, Antisthenes
and Aristippus). For the Cynic Hipparchia, the Atomist Lucretius and
the Stoic Marcus Aurelius, the boxes are too small for extra text to say
which school they were from. For the five earliest philosophers there are
no direct lines connecting them to the later philosophers included in the
diagram.
In English, names originally in Greek tend to be Latinised. To convert the
Latin version of a Greek name into an English transliteration of the Greek
original, it is usually enough to apply the following rules: replace -us with
-os, y with u, c with k, -o at the end of a name with -ôn, and if the stressed
syllable is -i, replace it with -ei.

Antipater
200-129
stoic
Chrysippus
280-205
stoic

Leucippus
470-410
atomist

|0
|

Cicero
106-43

Zeno
334-262
stoic
Gorgias
480-380
sophist

| 100
|

Sextus Empiricus 150-220
sceptic

|
| 300

|
| 200

|
| 200

|
| 100

|
|0

|
| 100

|
| 200

translation of
Stoische Notities – de stoicijnen en andere klassieke filosofen
als bron van inspiratie voor geluk en een mooiere wereld
original text: Rymke Wiersma 2008
translation: Stuart Field 2014
book and font design: Weia Reinboud
font: Atalanta
a searchable and dowloadable version of this text can be found at:
www.at-a-lanta.nl/opdezesite.html
Atalanta started 1980 as a women’s print shop
turning to publishing a few years later
with publications mostly about
philosophy, environment and politics
and also books for children.
ATALANTA
www.at-A-lanta.nl
atalanta@at-A-lanta-nl

